? 
 
  Online PG Nepal Online PG Nepal Online PG Nepal Online PG Nepal 
 
This PDF file has been individualized for digital u niqueness based upon your Email address and Mobile 
number. Materials sent by the Online PG Nepal is for educational purpose only. Circulating the co ntents to anyone 
other than the intended by Online PG Nepal in any f orm (print or digital) would be considered violatio n of copyright 
protection and would attract legal actions. In view  of the possibility of human error or changes in medical sciences, 
we don't warrant that the information contained her ein is in every respect accurate or complete. CEE MD/MS BASED MODEL TEST 
Falgun 8 Falgun 8 Falgun 8 Falgun 8 , 2077 (Saturday) , 2077 (Saturday) , 2077 (Saturday) , 2077 (Saturday) Questions Answers Explanations 
 
 Online PG Nepal Online PG Nepal Online PG Nepal Online PG Nepal 
Designed to make you more Designed to make you more Designed to make you more Designed to make you more 
confident. confident. confident. confident. 
Master the high yield and most Master the high yield and most Master the high yield and most Master the high yield and most 
frequently tested questions. frequently tested questions. frequently tested questions. frequently tested questions. 
Simulate Simulate Simulate Simulate 
pattern. pattern. pattern. pattern.     
Review your Rank among others, Review your Rank among others, Review your Rank among others, Review your Rank among others, 
and re and re and re and re -- --
required to ace the competitive required to ace the competitive required to ace the competitive required to ace the competitive 
exams. exams. exams. exams.     
Discover your weakness and focus Discover your weakness and focus Discover your weakness and focus Discover your weakness and focus 
on it. on it. on it. on it.    
Practice and Learn. Practice and Learn. Practice and Learn. Practice and Learn. 
Designed by 10 Designed by 10 Designed by 10 Designed by 10 
all toppers and rankers all toppers and rankers all toppers and rankers all toppers and rankers 
years of competitive exams. years of competitive exams. years of competitive exams. years of competitive exams. 
Recommended by all toppers and Recommended by all toppers and Recommended by all toppers and Recommended by all toppers and 
rankers of Last year entrance in rankers of Last year entrance in rankers of Last year entrance in rankers of Last year entrance in 
Email: onlinepgnepal@gmail.com 
Facebook: fb.com/onlinepgnepal 
Instagram: instagram.com/onlinepgnepal 
Viber: 9801114177 
Mobile: 9801114177 This PDF file has been individualized for digital u niqueness based upon your Email address and Mobile 
is for educational purpose only. Circulating the co ntents to anyone 
other than the intended by Online PG Nepal in any f orm (print or digital) would be considered violatio n of copyright 
of human error or changes in medical sciences, 
we don't warrant that the information contained her ein is in every respect accurate or complete.  MD/MS BASED MODEL TEST  
, 2077 (Saturday) , 2077 (Saturday) , 2077 (Saturday) , 2077 (Saturday)     Questions Answers Explanations 
[QAE file] Online PG Nepal Online PG Nepal Online PG Nepal Online PG Nepal     
Designed to make you more Designed to make you more Designed to make you more Designed to make you more 
confident. confident. confident. confident.     
Master the high yield and most Master the high yield and most Master the high yield and most Master the high yield and most 
frequently tested questions. frequently tested questions. frequently tested questions. frequently tested questions. 
Simulate Simulate Simulate Simulate the real test in expected the real test in expected the real test in expected the real test in expected 
    
Review your Rank among others, Review your Rank among others, Review your Rank among others, Review your Rank among others, 
-- --design the extra efforts design the extra efforts design the extra efforts design the extra efforts 
required to ace the competitive required to ace the competitive required to ace the competitive required to ace the competitive 
    
Discover your weakness and focus Discover your weakness and focus Discover your weakness and focus Discover your weakness and focus 
Practice and Learn. Practice and Learn. Practice and Learn. Practice and Learn.     
Designed by 10 Designed by 10 Designed by 10 Designed by 10 0+ experts, and near 0+ experts, and near 0+ experts, and near 0+ experts, and near 
all toppers and rankers all toppers and rankers all toppers and rankers all toppers and rankers of past of past of past of past 4 4 44    
years of competitive exams. years of competitive exams. years of competitive exams. years of competitive exams.     
Recommended by all toppers and Recommended by all toppers and Recommended by all toppers and Recommended by all toppers and 
rankers of Last year entrance in rankers of Last year entrance in rankers of Last year entrance in rankers of Last year entrance in 
Contact details: 
Email: onlinepgnepal@gmail.com  
Facebook: fb.com/onlinepgnepal  
Instagram: instagram.com/onlinepgnepal  
Viber: 9801114177  
Mobile: 9801114177  Questions Answers Explanations  ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
2  
 ONLINE PG NEPAL ONLINE PG NEPAL ONLINE PG NEPAL ONLINE PG NEPAL    
CEE CEE CEE CEE MD/MS BASED MODEL TEST MD/MS BASED MODEL TEST MD/MS BASED MODEL TEST MD/MS BASED MODEL TEST    
(Saturday, Falgun 8, 2077) 
www.onlinepgnepal.com 
Visit our website for Online Model Tests and variou s PG preparation related stuffs and activities. 
 
 
Time: 3 Hours                                                                                                                                                           Full marks: 200  
No negative markings 
 
How to get Daily Viber Update services: Step wise  
• Save our number 9801114177 in your Mobile contact l ist as Online PG Nepal (Saving number is important) .  
• Send us "Hello, my name is ……" message in Viber num ber of 9801114177. Send your Email address, MBBS co llege. 
• We will send you updates about various MD/MS entran ce related activities, notices, questions, answers through 
Viber. Any correction or explanation updates will b e sent in Viber. 
 
Medicine 
1. Bone marrow density 2 SD below the reference lev el is labeled as: 
a.  Normal level 
b.  Low bone mass 
c.  Osteoporosis 
d.  Severe osteoporosis 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Authors: Joel S Finkelstein et al., Clinical m anifestations, diagnosis and evaluation of osteopor osis in men 
 Normal: A value for BMD within 1.0 SD of the young adult female reference mean (T-score greater than o r equal 
to -1.0 SD). 
 Low bone mass (osteopenia): A value for BMD more th an 1.0 but less than 2.5 SD below the young adult f emale 
reference mean (T-score less than -1 and greater th an -2.5 SD). 
 Osteoporosis: A value for BMD 2.5 or more SD below the young adult female reference mean (T-score less  than or 
equal to -2.5 SD). 
 Severe (established) osteoporosis: A value for BMD more than 2.5 SD below the young adult female refer ence 
mean in the presence of one or more fragility fract ures 
 
2. Which of the following joint is rarely involved in SLE? 
a.  PIP joints 
b.  Carpal joints 
c.  Knee joints 
d.  Sacroiliac joints 
 ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
3  
 Ans: d 
Ref: Authors: Peter H Schur et al., Musculoskeletal  manifestations of SLE 
 The arthritis and arthralgias of SLE tend to be mig ratory; symptoms in a particular joint may be gone within 24 
hours. 
 Involvement is usually symmetrical and polyarticula r with a predilection for the knees, carpal joints,  and joints of 
the fingers, especially the proximal interphalangea l (PIP) joint. The ankles, elbows, shoulders, and h ips are less 
frequently involved. Involvement of the sacroiliac joints and cervical spine may occur but is rare. Mo noarticular 
arthritis is unusual and suggests an alternative ca use such as infection. 
 Morning stiffness is usually measured in minutes an d is not prolonged as in RA. 
 The degree of pain often exceeds objective physical  findings, and tenderness may be difficult to asses s because of 
increased pain sensitivity in some patients, either  of which can be associated with coexisting fibromy algia. 
 
3. The term "Large vessels" in large vessel vasculi tis indicates: 
a.  Arteries arising from arch of aorta 
b.  Arteries directly arising from any part of aorta 
c.  Arteries of size (diameter) more than 5 cm 
d.  Arteries supplying the main viscera 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: International Chapel Hill Consensus Conference  on the Nomenclature of Vasculitides (CHCC2012) 
A. Large vessel vasculitis 
Vasculitis affecting large arteries more often than  other vasculitides. Large arteries are the aorta a nd its major branches. 
Any size artery may be affected. 
B. Medium vessel vasculitis 
Vasculitis predominantly affecting medium arteries defined as the main visceral arteries and their bra nches. Any size 
artery may be affected. Inflammatory aneurysms and stenoses are common. 
C. Small vessel vasculitis 
Vasculitis predominantly affecting small vessels, d efined as small intraparenchymal arteries, arteriol es, capillaries, and 
venules. Medium arteries and veins may be affected.  
 
4. The most commonly used drug in  sarcoidosis is: 
a.  Methotrexate 
b.  Azathioprine 
c.  Steroid 
d.  NSAIDS 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: Author:Talmadge E King et al.,Treatment of pul monary sarcoidosis 
Glucocorticoids are the most commonly used medicati on for the treatment of pulmonary sarcoidosis, alth ough no 
medications have been approved by the US Food and D rug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of sarco idosis. 
However, some patients with sarcoidosis cannot tole rate or do not respond to glucocorticoids. Several alternative 
approaches have been proposed, such as the use of i mmunosuppressive, cytotoxic, and antimalarial drugs . In addition, 
irradiation has been used for neurosarcoidosis and organ transplantation has been performed successful ly for end-stage 
hepatic, renal, cardiac, or pulmonary disease compl icating sarcoidosis. Unfortunately, limited data ex ist regarding the 
indications and efficacy of these approaches in the  management of pulmonary sarcoidosis. ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
4   
5. A 45 years old male presented with jaundice and ascites. On evaluation, his serum bilirubin was 2.1  mg/dl, serum 
albumin was 3.4 g/dl, INR was 1.8,had controlled 
a.  A 
b.  B 
c.  C 
d.  Above data are insufficient to classify 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine; 20 th Edition, Page No: 2337 
 
6. Half life of serum albumin is: 
a.  1-3 days 
b.  3-7 days 
c.  7-14 days 
d.  14-21 days 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine; 20 th Edition, Page No: 2322 
Albumin: 
 Lacks sensitivity and specificity for malnutrition.  
 Potent risk indicator for morbidity and mortality. 
 Proxy measure for underlying injury, disease or inf
 Half-life is 14–20 days. 
 Also consider liver disease, nephrotic syndrome, an d protein 
 
7. Which of the following micronutrient potentiates  action of insulin? 
a.  Zinc 
b.  Chromium 
c.  Magnesium 
d.  Calcium 
 
Ans: b 
5. A 45 years old male presented with jaundice and ascites. On evaluation, his serum bilirubin was 2.1  mg/dl, serum 
albumin was 3.4 g/dl, INR was 1.8,had controlled ascites and  minimal HE. His Child Pugh class would  be 
Above data are insufficient to classify  
Ref: Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine; 20 th Edition, Page No: 2337  
 
Ref: Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine; 20 th Edition, Page No: 2322  
Lacks sensitivity and specificity for malnutrition.   
Potent risk indicator for morbidity and mortality.  
Proxy measure for underlying injury, disease or inf lammation.  
Also consider liver disease, nephrotic syndrome, an d protein -wasting enteropathy. 
7. Which of the following micronutrient potentiates  action of insulin?  
QAE FALGUN 8  
 5. A 45 years old male presented with jaundice and ascites. On evaluation, his serum bilirubin was 2.1  mg/dl, serum 
ascites and  minimal HE. His Child Pugh class would  be  ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
5  Ref: Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine; 20th Edition, Page  No: 2319 
Chromium potentiates the  action  of  insulin in pa tients with impaired glucose tolerance, presumably by increasing insulin 
receptor– mediated signaling, although its usefulness in trea ting type 2 
blood lipid profiles has been reported in some pati ents. The usefulness of chromium supplements in mus cle building has 
not been substantiated. Rich food sources of chromi um include yeast, meat, and grain 
state is found in supplements and is largely nontox ic; however, chromium 
known pulmonary carcinogen as well as a cause of li ver, kidney, and CNS damage. 
 
8. Magenta tongue is seen due to the deficiency of: 
a.  Thiamine 
b.  Riboflavin 
c.  Niacin 
d.  Pyridoxine 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine; 20 th Edition, Page No: 2310 
 
9. The score system used to estimate the risk of is chemic stroke in the first two days af 
a.  NIHSS 
b.  CHA2DS2-VASc 
c.  HAS-BLED 
d.  ABCD2 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Authors: Karen L Furie et al., Initial evaluat ion and management of TIA and minor ischemic stroke
ABCD2 score: 
The ABCD2 score can be used to estimate the risk of  ischemic stroke in the first two d 
follows: 
A. Age: 
Principles of Internal Medicine; 20th Edition, Page  No: 2319  
Chromium potentiates the  action  of  insulin in pa tients with impaired glucose tolerance, presumably by increasing insulin 
mediated signaling, although its usefulness in trea ting type 2  diabetes is uncertain. In addition, improvement in 
blood lipid profiles has been reported in some pati ents. The usefulness of chromium supplements in mus cle building has 
not been substantiated. Rich food sources of chromi um include yeast, meat, and grain products. Chromium in the trivalent 
state is found in supplements and is largely nontox ic; however, chromium -6 is a product of stainless steel welding and is a 
known pulmonary carcinogen as well as a cause of li ver, kidney, and CNS damage.  
tongue is seen due to the deficiency of:  
Ref: Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine; 20 th Edition, Page No: 2310  
9. The score system used to estimate the risk of is chemic stroke in the first two days af ter TIA is: 
Ref: Authors: Karen L Furie et al., Initial evaluat ion and management of TIA and minor ischemic stroke
The ABCD2 score can be used to estimate the risk of  ischemic stroke in the first two d ays after TIA. The score is tallied as 
QAE FALGUN 8  
 Chromium potentiates the  action  of  insulin in pa tients with impaired glucose tolerance, presumably by increasing insulin 
diabetes is uncertain. In addition, improvement in 
blood lipid profiles has been reported in some pati ents. The usefulness of chromium supplements in mus cle building has 
products. Chromium in the trivalent 
6 is a product of stainless steel welding and is a 
 
ter TIA is:  
Ref: Authors: Karen L Furie et al., Initial evaluat ion and management of TIA and minor ischemic stroke  
ays after TIA. The score is tallied as 
ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
6  
  ≥60 years=1 point 
 <60 years=0 points 
B. Blood pressure elevation when first assessed aft er TIA: 
 Systolic ≥140 mmHg or diastolic ≥90 mmHg=1 point 
 Systolic <140 mmHg and diastolic <90 mmHg=0 points 
C. Clinical features: 
 Unilateral weakness=2 point 
 Isolated speech disturbance=1 point 
 Other= 0 point 
D. 
I. Duration of TIA symptoms: 
 ≥60 minutes=2 points 
 10 to 59 minutes=1 point 
 <10 minutes=0 point 
II. Diabetes: 
 Present = 1 point 
 Absent = 0 point 
 
10. Diastolic murmur heard in apex in a case of aor tic regurgitation is due to: 
a.  Carey coombs murmur 
b.  Gallavardin phenomenon 
c.  Austin flint murmur 
d.  Dock's murmur 
 
Ans: c 
Austin Flint murmur — An apical diastolic rumbling murmur has been described in patients with pure aor tic regurgitation. 
Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain th e genesis of this murmur, including fluttering of t he mitral valve 
from the impingement by the aortic regurgitant jet,  relative (functional) mitral stenosis, and regurgi tant jets directed 
against the left ventricular free wall. 
Carey-Coombs murmur — In acute rheumatic fever, a m id-diastolic murmur over the left ventricular impul se, a Carey-
Coombs murmur, has been attributed to acute mitral valvulitis. However, first-degree atrioventricular block (prolonged PR 
interval) is common in rheumatic carditis and an in creased flow due to earlier atrial systole coincidi ng with the rapid filling 
phase may contribute to a Carey-Coombs murmur. 
In older patients with calcific trileaflet AS, an M SM with a musical quality is frequently heard over the cardiac apex or 
along the lower left sternal border, in addition to  a harsh murmur over the right second interspace. A  musical murmur 
appears to originate from the vibration of the valv e and subvalvular structures and can be recorded in  the left ventricular 
(LV) cavity (Gallavardin phenomenon); a harsh murmu r originates in the aortic root and is related to t he high-velocity 
ejection jet.  
Dock’s murmur occurs when there is a severe stenosi s of the left anterior descending coronary artery. The murmur 
produced is diastolic since the coronary arteries f ill in diastole. It is described as early diastolic  and decrescendo sounding 
similar to the murmur of aortic regurgitation. 
 
11. Which of the following electrolyte disorder cau ses atrioventricular block? 
a.  Hypokalemia 
b.  Hypernatremia ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
7  c.  Hypomagnesemia 
d.  Hypermagnesemia 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine; 20 th Edition, Page No: 1728 
 
12. Which of the following is not included in famil y of PSVT? 
a.  AV node reentry 
b.  AV node reentry using accessory pathway 
c.  Atrial tachycardia 
d.  Inappropriate sinus tachycardia 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine; 20 th Edition, Page No: 1733 
Supraventricular tachycardia can be of brief durati on, termed 
such as cardioversion or drug administration, is re quired for termination. Episodes that occur with su dden onset and 
termination are referred to as paroxysmal. Paroxysm al supraventricular tachyca 
tachycardias including AV node reentry, AV reentry using an accessory pathway, and atrial tachycardia.
 
13. What happens to blood pressure and heart rate d uring recovery phase of Valsalva maneuver? 
a.  ↑BP ,↓HR 
b.  ↓BP,↑HR 
c.  Both BP and HR ↑ 
d.  Both BP and HR ↓ 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine; 20 th Edition, Page No: 3162 
Ref: Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine; 20 th Edition, Page No: 1728  
 
12. Which of the following is not included in famil y of PSVT?  
AV node reentry using accessory pathway  
Ref: Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine; 20 th Edition, Page No: 1733  
Supraventricular tachycardia can be of brief durati on, termed nonsustained, or can be sustained such that an inte rvention, 
such as cardioversion or drug administration, is re quired for termination. Episodes that occur with su dden onset and 
termination are referred to as paroxysmal. Paroxysm al supraventricular tachyca rdia (PSVT) refers to a family of 
tachycardias including AV node reentry, AV reentry using an accessory pathway, and atrial tachycardia.
13. What happens to blood pressure and heart rate d uring recovery phase of Valsalva maneuver? 
Ref: Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine; 20 th Edition, Page No: 3162  
QAE FALGUN 8  
 nonsustained, or can be sustained such that an inte rvention, 
such as cardioversion or drug administration, is re quired for termination. Episodes that occur with su dden onset and 
rdia (PSVT) refers to a family of 
tachycardias including AV node reentry, AV reentry using an accessory pathway, and atrial tachycardia.  
13. What happens to blood pressure and heart rate d uring recovery phase of Valsalva maneuver?  ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
8   
14. Which of the following is not true about tetanu s? 
a.  It is completely preventable by vaccination 
b.  Puncture entry wound is found in every case 
c.  Deeper infections are associated with more severe d isease 
d.  Persons more than 60 years of age are at greater ri sk of tetanus 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine; 20 th Edition, Page No: 1102 
 Tetanus is an acute disease manifes ted by skeletal muscle spasm and autonomic nervous system disturbance. It is 
caused by a powerful neurotoxin produced by the bac terium Clostridium tetani and is completely prevent able by 
vaccination. 
 In 20- 30% of cases of tetanus, no puncture entry wound i 
common infection sites in adults. Deeper infections  (e.g., attributable to open fracture, abortion, or  drug injection) 
are associated with more severe disease and worse o utcomes. 
 Persons>60 years of age are at greater risk of tetanus because antibody  levels decrease over time. 
 
15. Adult intestinal colonization botulism is assoc iated with 
a.  Food borne 
b.  Traumatic wound contamination 
c.  Iatrogenic 
d.  Antibiotic use 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine; 20th Edition, Page No: 1106 
 Adult Intestinal- Colonization Botulism This form of botulism is diff icult to confirm because it is poorly understood. 
No clear criteria are available to differentiate ca ses of adult intestinal 
botulism cases.  
 Often these cases are caused by C. baratii type F, but the involvement of both C. botulinum type A and  C. 
butyricum type E have been reported. Botulism follo wing abdominal surgery or antibiotic use has someti mes been 
considered to be adult intestinal- colonization botulism. 
 
16. A 9 year boy presented with the features of tru ncal and limb ataxia, dysarthria, myoclonic jerks, areflexia, extensor 
plantar response and distal sensory deficit. He had  repeated history of pneu 
lymphadenopathy. The probable diagnosis is 
a.  Spinocerebellar ataxia 
14. Which of the following is not true about tetanu s?  
It is completely preventable by vaccination  
Puncture entry wound is found in every case s of tetanus 
Deeper infections are associated with more severe d isease  
Persons more than 60 years of age are at greater ri sk of tetanus  
Ref: Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine; 20 th Edition, Page No: 1102  
ted by skeletal muscle spasm and autonomic nervous system disturbance. It is 
caused by a powerful neurotoxin produced by the bac terium Clostridium tetani and is completely prevent able by 
30% of cases of tetanus, no puncture entry wound i s found. Superficial abrasions to the limbs are the  most 
common infection sites in adults. Deeper infections  (e.g., attributable to open fracture, abortion, or  drug injection) 
are associated with more severe disease and worse o utcomes.  
age are at greater risk of tetanus because antibody  levels decrease over time. 
15. Adult intestinal colonization botulism is assoc iated with  
Medicine; 20th Edition, Page No: 1106  
Colonization Botulism This form of botulism is diff icult to confirm because it is poorly understood. 
No clear criteria are available to differentiate ca ses of adult intestinal -colonization botulism fr 
Often these cases are caused by C. baratii type F, but the involvement of both C. botulinum type A and  C. 
butyricum type E have been reported. Botulism follo wing abdominal surgery or antibiotic use has someti mes been 
colonization botulism.  
16. A 9 year boy presented with the features of tru ncal and limb ataxia, dysarthria, myoclonic jerks, areflexia, extensor 
plantar response and distal sensory deficit. He had  repeated history of pneu monia in the past. He also has generalized 
lymphadenopathy. The probable diagnosis is  
QAE FALGUN 8  
  
ted by skeletal muscle spasm and autonomic nervous system disturbance. It is 
caused by a powerful neurotoxin produced by the bac terium Clostridium tetani and is completely prevent able by 
s found. Superficial abrasions to the limbs are the  most 
common infection sites in adults. Deeper infections  (e.g., attributable to open fracture, abortion, or  drug injection) 
age are at greater risk of tetanus because antibody  levels decrease over time.  
Colonization Botulism This form of botulism is diff icult to confirm because it is poorly understood. 
colonization botulism fr om other adult 
Often these cases are caused by C. baratii type F, but the involvement of both C. botulinum type A and  C. 
butyricum type E have been reported. Botulism follo wing abdominal surgery or antibiotic use has someti mes been 
16. A 9 year boy presented with the features of tru ncal and limb ataxia, dysarthria, myoclonic jerks, areflexia, extensor 
monia in the past. He also has generalized 
ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
9  
 b.  Friedreich's ataxia 
c.  Ataxia telangiectasia 
d.  Mitochondrial ataxia 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine; 20 th Edition, Page No: 3157 
Ataxia Telangiectasia  
Symptoms and signs: 
 Patients with ataxia telangiectasia (AT) present in  the first decade of life with progressive telangie ctatic lesions 
associated with deficits in cerebellar function and  nystagmus.  
 The neurologic manifestations correspond to those i n Friedreich’s disease, which should be included in  the 
differential diagnosis.  
 Truncal and limb ataxia, dysarthria, extensor plant ar responses, myoclonic jerks, areflexia, and dista l sensory 
deficits may develop.  
 There is a high incidence of recurrent pulmonary in fections and neoplasms of the lymphatic and 
reticuloendothelial system in patients with AT. Thy mic hypoplasia with cellular and humoral (IgA and I gG2) 
immunodeficiencies, premature aging, and endocrine disorders such as type 1 diabetes mellitus are desc ribed.  
 There is an increased incidence of lymphomas, Hodgk in’s disease, acute T cell leukemias, and breast ca ncer. 
 
17. The diagnosis of acromegaly is confirmed by 
a.  Measurement of random Growth hormone level 
b.  IGF-I level 
c.  MRI pituitary 
d.  Oral glucose tolerance test 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine; 20 th Edition, Page No: 2679 
Laboratory Investigation  
 Age-matched serum IGF-I levels are elevated in acro megaly. Consequently, an IGF-I level provides a use ful 
laboratory screening measure when clinical features  raise the possibility of acromegaly.  
 Owing to the pulsatility of GH secretion, measureme nt of a single random GH level is not useful for th e diagnosis 
or exclusion of acromegaly and does not correlate w ith disease severity. 
 The diagnosis of acromegaly is confirmed by demonst rating the failure of GH suppression to <0.4 μg/L w ithin 1-
2 h of an oral glucose load (75 g). 
 
18. Differentiating the ACTH dependent Cushing's sy ndrome, which of the following feature is more prom inently seen in 
ACTH secreting pituitary tumor as compared to ectop ic ACTH secretion 
a.  Rapid onset 
b.  Pigmentation 
c.  Severe myopathy 
d.  None of the above 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine; 20 th Edition, Page No: 2681 ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
10    
 
Surgery 
19. Poor host immune reaction denotes: 
a.  Tuberculoid leprosy 
b.  Lepromatous leprosy 
c.  Borderline leprosy 
d.  Drug resistant leprosy 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 27 th Edition, Page No: 68 
Mycobacterium leprae – pathology 
 Leprosy is a chronic curable infection caused by 
 It occurs mainly in tropical regions and resource 
 The majority of cases are located in the Indian sub continent 
 Transmission is through nasal secretions, the baci 
 It is attributed to poor hygiene and insanitary con ditions 
 The incubation period is several years 
 The initial infection occurs in childhood 
 Lepromatous leprosy denotes a poor host immune reac tion 
 Tuberculoid leprosy occurs when host resistance is stronger tha n the virulence of the organism 
 
20. Harmonic scalpel uses which of the following to  cut tissues? 
a.  Cold 
b.  Heat 
c.  Ultrasound 
d.  Fire 
 
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 27 th Edition, Page No: 68  
Leprosy is a chronic curable infection caused by Mycobacterium leprae 
It occurs mainly in tropical regions and resource -poor countries 
The majority of cases are located in the Indian sub continent  
Transmission is through nasal secretions, the baci llus inhabiting the colder parts of the body 
It is attributed to poor hygiene and insanitary con ditions  
The incubation period is several years  
The initial infection occurs in childhood  
Lepromatous leprosy denotes a poor host immune reac tion  
leprosy occurs when host resistance is stronger tha n the virulence of the organism 
20. Harmonic scalpel uses which of the following to  cut tissues?  
QAE FALGUN 8  
 llus inhabiting the colder parts of the body  
leprosy occurs when host resistance is stronger tha n the virulence of the organism  ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
11   
  
Ans: c 
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 27 th Edition, Page No: 104 
 The harmonic scalpel is an instrument that uses ultrasound technology  to cut tissues while simultaneously sealing 
them. 
 It utilises a hand-held ultrasound transducer and s calpel which is controlled by a hand switch or foot  pedal.  
 During use, the scalpel vibrates in the 20 000–50 0 00 Hz range and cuts through tissues, effecting hae mostasis by 
sealing vessels and tissues by means of protein den aturation caused by vibration rather than heat (in a similar 
manner to whisking an egg white). 
 
21. Which of the following is a major consequence o f undescended testis? 
a.  Infection 
b.  Infertility 
c.  Malignancy 
d.  Both B and C 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 27 th Edition, Page No: 125 
The undescended testis 
 A retractile testis reaches the base of the scrotum  but retracts 
 An undescended testis may be palpable or impalpable  
 An ectopic testis lies outside the normal line of d escent 
 Palpable undescended testes undergo a single stage orchidopexy 
 Impalpable undescended testes undergo a single stag e orchidopexy 
 Orchidopexy before 1 year of age improves fertility  and may reduce the risk of malignancy 
A palpable undescended testis ideally requires a da y-case orchidopexy between 6 and 12 months of age. The testis is 
mobilised through an inguinal incision, preserving the vas deferens and testicular vessels. The associ ated patent processus 
vaginalis is ligated and divided at the internal ri ng and the testis is placed in a subdartos scrotal pouch. 
 
22. A 5 weeks old male child presents with vomiting . Olive felt at right upper quadrant of abdomen sug gests a diagnosis 
of: 
a.  Intussusception 
b.  Pyloric stenosis 
c.  Tracheo-esophageal fistula 
d.  Ileal atresia 
 
Ans: b 
 
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 27 th Edition, Page No: 128 
Infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis 
 Most commonly affects boys aged 2–8 weeks 
 Projectile vomiting after feeds 
 Test feed or ultrasound to confirm the diagnosis 
 Gastric peristalsis can be seen and an ‘olive’ felt  
 Hypochloraemic metabolic alkalosis must be correcte d before surgery ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
12   
  Pyloromyotomy splits the hypertrophied muscle leavi ng themucosa intact 
IHPS can be diagnosed clinically. During a test fee d there is visible gastric peristalsis passing from  left to right across the 
upper abdomen and in a relaxed baby the pyloric ‘tu mour’ is palpable as an ‘olive’ in the right upper quadrant. The 
diagnosis can be confirmed by an ultrasound, which shows the thickened pyloric muscle. 
 
23. Mucosal rectal prolapse in toddlers are treated  with: 
a.  Observation 
b.  Antibiotics 
c.  Strapping 
d.  Surgery 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 27 th Edition, Page No: 131 
 Mucosal rectal prolapse can occur in toddlers and i s exacerbated by straining or squatting on a potty.   
 It is typically intermittent and frequently self-li miting.  
 Rarely, it may be secondary to cystic fibrosis or s pinal dysraphism.  
 The differential diagnosis includes a prolapsing re ctal polyp.  
 Underlying factors, such as constipation, should be  treated.  
 Recurrent symptomatic prolapse usually responds to injection sclerotherapy. 
 Strapping the buttocks is ineffective. 
 
24. Which of the following is not recommended in lo w risk procedures in patients receiving warfarin? 
a.  No adjustment to anticoagulation required 
b.  Check INR within the week before procedure 
c.  Avoid elective procedures when anticoagulation is a bove the therapeutic range 
d.  Discontinue warfarin 5 days before the procedure 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 27 th Edition, Page No: 221 
Recommendations concerning warfarin anticoagulant m anagement 
Low-risk procedures 
 No adjustment to anticoagulation required 
 Check INR within the week before procedure 
 Avoid elective procedures when anticoagulation is a bove the therapeutic range 
High-risk procedure in a patient with a low-risk co ndition 
 Discontinue warfarin 5 days before the procedure 
 Check INR on day of procedure to ensure <1.5 
 Restart warfarin on evening after procedure if unco mplicated and recheck INR in 1 week 
High-risk procedure in a patient with a high-risk c ondition 
 Discontinue warfarin 5 days before the procedure 
 Start low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) 2 days af ter stopping warfarin 
 Check INR on day of procedure to ensure <1.5 
 Omit LMWH on day of procedure 
 Warfarin may be resumed the night of the procedure ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
13    LMWH should be continued until INR 
 The decision to administer intravenous heparin shou ld be individualized 
 
25. Chloride content of Normal saline is (in mmol/L ): 
a.  111 
b.  145 
c.  154 
d.  132 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 27 th Edition, Page No: 281 
Composition of crystalloid and colloid solutions (mmol/L): 
 
26. Atlantoaxial instability means abnormal movemen t between which of the following? 
a.  Occiput and C1 
b.  Occiput and C1 or C2 
c.  C1 and C2 
d.  C2 and C3 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 27 th 
Atlantoaxial instability 
 This is defined as non- physiological movement between C1 and C2. 
 It can be translational or rotatory and resolves ei ther spontaneously or with traction followed by a c ervical collar. 
 Isolated, traumatic transverse ligament rupture leading to C1/2 instabi lity is uncommon and is treated with 
posterior C1/2 fusion 
 
27. e in eFAST means: 
a.  Extrapolated 
b.  Extended 
c.  Electronic 
d.  Extra-abdominal 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 27 th Edition, Pag 
Extended focused assessment with sonar for trauma 
 Ultrasound can be used to differentiate between con tusion and the actual presence of blood. 
 Extended focused assessment with sonar for trauma ( eFAST) is becoming the most common investigation. 
LMWH should be continued until INR adequate 
The decision to administer intravenous heparin shou ld be individualized  
25. Chloride content of Normal saline is (in mmol/L ):  
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 27 th Edition, Page No: 281  
crystalloid and colloid solutions (mmol/L):  
26. Atlantoaxial instability means abnormal movemen t between which of the following?  
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 27 th Edition, Page No: 346 
physiological movement between C1 and C2.  
It can be translational or rotatory and resolves ei ther spontaneously or with traction followed by a c ervical collar. 
transverse ligament rupture leading to C1/2 instabi lity is uncommon and is treated with 
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 27 th Edition, Pag e No: 366 
Extended focused assessment with sonar for trauma  
Ultrasound can be used to differentiate between con tusion and the actual presence of blood. 
Extended focused assessment with sonar for trauma ( eFAST) is becoming the most common investigation. 
QAE FALGUN 8  
  
It can be translational or rotatory and resolves ei ther spontaneously or with traction followed by a c ervical collar.  
transverse ligament rupture leading to C1/2 instabi lity is uncommon and is treated with 
Ultrasound can be used to differentiate between con tusion and the actual presence of blood.  
Extended focused assessment with sonar for trauma ( eFAST) is becoming the most common investigation.  
ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
14    The technique uses sonar assessment in the chest, lo oking for a cardiac tamponade or free blood and air  in the 
hemithorax on each side, and assessment for blood i n the abdominal cavity, in the paracolic gutters, 
subdiaphragmatic spaces and pelvis.  
 
28. In t riage, colour coding for urgent case is: 
a.  Red 
b.  Yellow 
c.  Green 
d.  Black 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 27 th Edition, Page No: 412 
 
29. Tenosynovitis of the abductor pollicis longus ( APL) and extensor pollicis brevis (EPB) is known as : 
a.  Baby’s wrist 
b.  Soldier’s wrist 
c.  New mother’s wrist 
d.  Student’s wrist 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 27 th Edition, Page No: 507, 508 
De Quervain’s disease 
 De Quervain’s disease is caused by tenosynovitis of  the abductor pollicis longus (APL) and extensor po llicis brevis 
(EPB) in the first dorsal wrist extensor compartmen t (1st EC). 
 It is predominantly seen in middle -
inflammatory arthritis.  
 The clinical features are radial wrist pain, tender ness, swelling and a positive Finkelstein’s test (p ain over the 1st 
EC associated with ulnar deviation of the wrist whe n the thumb is clasped in the p 
 The management options are non- steroidal anti 
of the extensor retinaculum of the first dorsal com partment. 
 If surgery is considered, careful attention should be paid to fully releas 
consist of bundles of separate tendon slips that li e in separate sheaths. 
 
30. Which of the following doe not participate in f ormation of anorectal ring? 
a.  Puborectalis muscle 
he technique uses sonar assessment in the chest, lo oking for a cardiac tamponade or free blood and air  in the 
hemithorax on each side, and assessment for blood i n the abdominal cavity, in the paracolic gutters, 
 
riage, colour coding for urgent case is:  
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 27 th Edition, Page No: 412  
29. Tenosynovitis of the abductor pollicis longus ( APL) and extensor pollicis brevis (EPB) is known as : 
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 27 th Edition, Page No: 507, 508  
De Quervain’s disease is caused by tenosynovitis of  the abductor pollicis longus (APL) and extensor po llicis brevis 
(EPB) in the first dorsal wrist extensor compartmen t (1st EC).  
-aged females and is associated with pregn ancy (new mother’s wrist) and 
The clinical features are radial wrist pain, tender ness, swelling and a positive Finkelstein’s test (p ain over the 1st 
EC associated with ulnar deviation of the wrist whe n the thumb is clasped in the p alm).  
steroidal anti -inflammatories, splintage, steroid injections and s urgical release 
of the extensor retinaculum of the first dorsal com partment.  
If surgery is considered, careful attention should be paid to fully releas ing the APL and EPB, which frequently 
consist of bundles of separate tendon slips that li e in separate sheaths.  
30. Which of the following doe not participate in f ormation of anorectal ring?  
QAE FALGUN 8  
 he technique uses sonar assessment in the chest, lo oking for a cardiac tamponade or free blood and air  in the 
hemithorax on each side, and assessment for blood i n the abdominal cavity, in the paracolic gutters, 
 
29. Tenosynovitis of the abductor pollicis longus ( APL) and extensor pollicis brevis (EPB) is known as :  
De Quervain’s disease is caused by tenosynovitis of  the abductor pollicis longus (APL) and extensor po llicis brevis 
ancy (new mother’s wrist) and 
The clinical features are radial wrist pain, tender ness, swelling and a positive Finkelstein’s test (p ain over the 1st 
 
inflammatories, splintage, steroid injections and s urgical release 
ing the APL and EPB, which frequently 
ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
15   
 b.  Deep external sphincter 
c.  Reflected fibers of pubococcygeus 
d.  Highest part of the internal sphincter 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 27 th Edition, Page No: 1339 
The anorectal ring 
 The anorectal ring marks the junction between the r ectum and the anal canal.  
 It is formed by the joining of the puborectalis mus cle, the deep external sphincter, conjoined longitu dinal muscle 
and the highest part of the internal sphincter.  
 The anorectal ring can be clearly felt digitally, e specially on its posterior and lateral aspects. 
 
31. Average length of rectum is: 
a.  3cm 
b.  5 cm 
c.  15 cm 
d.  25 cm 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 27 th Edition, Page No: 1318 
The adult rectum is approximately 12–18 cm in lengt h and is conventionally divided into three equal pa rts: the upper 
third, which is mobile and has a peritoneal coverin g anteriorly and laterally; the middle third, where  the peritoneum 
covers only the anterior and part of the lateral su rfaces; and the lowest third, which lies deep in th e pelvis below the 
peritoneal reflection. 
 
32. Which of the following is an extraintestinal ma nifestation of Crohn’s disease related to disease a ctivity? 
a.  Arthropathy 
b.  Gallstones 
c.  Primary sclerosing cholangitis 
d.  Sacroiliitis 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 27 th Edition, Page No: 1244 
Extraintestinal manifestations of Crohn’s disease 
Related to disease activity 
 Erythema nodosum 
 Pyoderma gangrenosum 
 Arthropathy 
 Eye complications (iritis/uveitis) 
 Aphthous ulceration 
 Amyloidosis 
Unrelated to disease activity Gallstones 
 Renal calculi 
 Primary sclerosing cholangitis 
 Chronic active hepatitis ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
16   
  Sacroiliitis 
 
33. Most common hernia in female is: 
a.  Inguinal 
b.  Femoral 
c.  Umbilical 
d.  Lumbar 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 27 th Edition, Page No: 1029 1035 
The inguinal hernia, often referred to as a ‘ruptur e’ by patients, is the most common hernia in men and women  but much 
more common in men. 
Femoral hernia 
 Less common than inguinal hernia 
 It is more common in women than in men 
 Easily missed on examination 
 Of cases 50% present as an emergency with very high  risk of strangulation 
 
34. Superficial veins of lower limb drains into dee p veins via: 
a.  Communicating vein 
b.  Perforator vein 
c.  Capacitance vein 
d.  Dorsal vein of calf 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 27 th Edition, Page No: 969 
The venous system of the lower limb can be divided anatomically into the superficial venous system , which is located 
within the superficial tissues and the deep venous system , beneath the deep fascia of the leg, accompanying the arterial 
tree.  
The superficial veins drain into the deep system, e ither at junctions or via fascial perforating veins , and the deep veins 
then return blood to the right atrium of the heart.   
 
35. What is the emergent management of tension pneu mothorax? 
a.  Tube thoracostomy in 5th intercostal space 
b.  Chest X-ray 
c.  Insert needle in 2nd intercostal space 
d.  Emergency room thoracotomy in unstable patient  
 
Ans: c 
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 27 th Edition, Page No: 366 
 Tension pneumothorax develops when a ‘one-way valve ’ air leak occurs either from the lung or  through  the  
chest wall. 
 Air is sucked into the thoracic cavity without any means of escape, completely collapsing then compres sing the 
affected lung. 
 The mediastinum is displaced to the opposite side, decreasing venous return and compressing the opposi te lung. ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
17   
  The most common causes are penetrating chest trauma , blunt chest trauma with parenchymal lung injury a nd air 
leak that did not spontaneously close, iatrogenic l ung punctures (e.g. due to subclavian central venep uncture) and 
mechanical positive pressure ventilation. 
 The clinical presentation is dramatic. The patient is increasingly panicky with tachypnoea, dyspnoea a nd distended 
neck veins (similar to pericardial tamponade). 
 Clinical examination may reveal tracheal deviation.  This is a late finding and is not necessary to cli nically confirm 
diagnosis. There will also be hyper-resonance and a bsent breath sounds over the affected hemithorax. 
 Tension pneumothorax is a  clinical diagnosis and t reatment should never be delayed by waiting for rad iological 
confirmation. 
 Treatment consists of immediate decompression, init ially by rapid insertion of a large-bore needle int o the second 
intercostal space in the midclavicular line of the affected hemithorax, then followed by insertion of a chest tube 
through the fifth intercostal space in the anterior  axillary line. 
 
36. FNAC cannot detect which of the following? 
a.  Follicular carcinoma  
b.  Papillary carcinoma  
c.  Colloid goiter  
d.  Hashimoto’s thyroiditis 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery 26 th Edition, Page No: 1097 
 Follicular carcinoma: These appear to be macroscopi cally encapsulated but, microscopically, there is i nvasion of 
the capsule and of the vascular spaces in the capsu lar region.  
 Multiple foci are seldom seen and lymph node involv ement is much less common than in papillary carcino ma. 
 Blood-borne metastases are more common and the even tual mortality rate is twice that of papillary canc er. 
 The hallmark of all follicular adenoma is the prese nce of an intact, well formed capsule encircling th e tumor. 
 Careful evaluation of the integrity of the capsule is therefore critical in distinguishing follicular adenoma from 
follicular carcinoma, which demonstrates capsular a nd /or vascular invasion. 
 
Obstetrics and Gynecology 
37. Which of the following is not a Spiegelberg‘s c riterion in diagnosis of ovarian pregnancy? 
a.  Tube on the affected side must be intact 
b.  The gestation sac must be in the position of the ov ary 
c.  The gestation sac is connected to the uterus by the  ovarian ligament 
d.  Uterus must be of normal size 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Dutta Obstetrics 8th Edition, Page No: 220 
Spiegelberg‘s criteria in diagnosis of ovarian preg nancy are 
 Tube on the affected side must be intact. 
 The gestation sac must be in the position of the ov ary.  
 The gestation sac is connected to the uterus by the  ovarian ligament.  
 The ovarian tissue must be found on its wall on his tological examination. 
The embedding may occur intrafollicular or extrafol licular. In either types, rupture is an inevitable phenomenon and 
salpingo-oophorectomy is the definite surgery . Ovarian resection could be done when the diagnosi s is made early. ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
18   
  
38. Which of the following is a known risk factor f or the development of choriocarcinoma following hyd atidiform mole? 
a.  Age 30 years 
b.  Parity 2 
c.  Serum hCG > 10,000 mIU/mL 
d.  Previous history of molar pregnancy 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Dutta Obstetrics 8th Edition, Page No: 226 
The development of choriocarcinoma following hydati diform mole ranges between 2–10% .  
Risk Factors for Malignant Change 
 Patient’s age ≥ 40 or < 20 years irrespective of pa rity 
 Parity ≥ 3. Age is more important than the parity 
 Serum hCG > 100,000 mIU/mL 
 Uterine size > 20 weeks 
 Previous history of molar pregnancy 
 Theca lutein cysts: large (>6 cm diameter) 
 
39. False knot in cord is due to: 
a.  Accumulation of Wharton’s jelly 
b.  Overlying of cod over one above 
c.  Crowding of cord 
d.  Short cord 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Dutta Obstetrics 8th Edition, Page No: 254 
Long cord :  
The clinical significance due to the presence of a long cord is that there is an increased chance of: 
 Cord prolapse.  
 Cord entanglement round the neck or the body. The c ondition may produce sufficient compression on the cord 
vessels so as to produce fetal distress or rarely d eath.  
 True knot is rare . Even with true knot the fetal vessels are protect ed from compression, by the Wharton’s jelly. 
False knots are the result of accumulation of Wharton’s jelly o r due to varices. 
 
40. If hypertension is persist beyond 6 months of d elivery, this is:  
a.  Residual hypertension 
b.  Recurrent hypertension 
c.  Chronic hypertension 
d.  Recalcitrant hypertension   
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Dutta Obstetrics 8th Edition, Page No: 263 
Residual hypertension:  
 It may persist even after 6 months following delive ry in about 50% cases.  ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
19   
  It is more related to familial diathesis and underl ying thrombophilias (protein C, protein S deficienc y, 
antiphospholipid syndrome).  
 Microvascular dysfunction due to insulin resistance  is also there. 
 
41. If the diagnosis of placental abruption is made  only after delivery, this is: 
a.  Grade 0 
b.  Grade 1 
c.  Grade 2 
d.  Grade 3 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Dutta Obstetrics 8th Edition, Page No: 297 
Depending upon the degree of placental abruption an d its clinical effects, the cases are graded as fol lows: 
 Grade—0: Clinical features may be absent. The diagnosis is m ade after inspection of placenta following delivery . 
 Grade—1 (40%): (i) vaginal bleeding is slight (ii) uterus : irritable, tenderness may be minimal or absent (i ii) 
maternal BP and fibrinogen levels unaffected (iv) FHS is good . 
 Grade—2 (45%): (i) vaginal bleeding mild to moderate (ii) uterine tenderness is always present (iii) maternal 
pulse ↑, BP is maintained (iv) fibrinogen level may be dec reased (v) shock is absent (vi) fetal distress or even 
fetal death occurs . 
 Grade—3 (15%): (i) bleeding is moderate to severe or may be concealed (ii) uterine tenderness is marked (iii) 
shock is pronounced (iv) fetal death is the rule (v) associated coagulation defect or anuria may complicate. 
 
42. Appearance of gas shadow in the chambers of the  heart and great vessels is: 
a.  Spalding sign 
b.  Robert sign 
c.  Snowstorm sign 
d.  T sign 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Dutta Obstetrics 8th Edition, Page No: 377 
Investigation in IUFD: 
 Sonography : Earliest diagnosis is possible with sonography . Th e evidences are: (a) Lack of all fetal motions  
(including cardiac) during a 10-minute period of ca reful observation with a real-time sonar is a strong 
presumptive evidence of fetal death and (b) Oligohydramnios and collapsed cranial bones  are evident. 
 Straight X-ray abdomen : Rarely done at present. The following features ma y be found, either singly or in 
combination. 
 Spalding sign: Th e irregular overlapping of the cranial bones on one another is due to liquefaction of the brain 
matter and softening of the ligamentous structures supporting the vault. It usually appears 7 days after death. 
 Hyperflexion of the spine is more common. In some cases hyperextension of the  neck is seen. Crowding of the 
ribs shadow with loss of normal parallelism. Appearance of gas shadow (Robert’s s sign) in the chambers of the 
heart and great vessels may appear as early as 12 h ours but difficult to interpret. 
 
43. The incidence of scar rupture in hysterotomy sc ar is: 
a.  0.2-1.5%  
b.  4-9%  ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
20   
 c.  12-15 % 
d.  25 % 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Dutta Obstetrics 8th Edition, Page No: 381 
There is increased risk of scar rupture. Whereas th e lower segment scar usually ruptures during labor that of classical or 
hysterotomy scar ruptures during late pregnancy and  labor. The incidence of scar rupture is about 0 .2–1.5% in the former 
and about 4–9% in the latter . 
Risk Factors for Scar Rupture 
 More the number (>2) of prior cesarean delivery 
 Interpregnancy interval <24 months 
 Induced labor 
 Augmentation of labor [with high dose oxytocin (>20  mU/min)] 
 Women having single layer uterine closure in prior cesarean delivery compared to double layer closure.  
 
44. Grand multipara is a pregnant mother who has go t previous ____ or more viable births. 
a.  1 
b.  2 
c.  3 
d.  4 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Dutta Obstetrics 8th Edition, Page No: 398 
A grand multipara relates to a pregnant mother who has got previous four or more viable births . 
The incidence has been gradually declining over the  couple of decades due to acceptance of small famil y norm but it still 
constitutes to about one-tenth of the hospital popu lation and accounts for one-third of the maternal d eaths in the 
developing countries. 
Ref: Grand multiparity by Sara Ellis Simonsen in Up ToDate 
A reasonable definition of "grand multiparity" is a  woman who has had ≥5 births (live or stillborn) at  ≥20 weeks of 
gestation, with "great grand multiparity" defined a s ≥10 births (live or stillborn) ≥20 weeks of gesta tion. 
 
45. Least common type of female pelvis is: 
a.  Gynecoid 
b.  Anthropoid 
c.  Android 
d.  Platypelloid 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Dutta Obstetrics 8th Edition, Page No: 402 
Variations of female pelvis:  
The size and shape of the female pelvis differ so w idely due to morphological factors such as developm ental, sexual, racial 
and evolutionary that it is indeed difficult to def ine what the features of a normal pelvis are.  
However, on the basis of the shape of the inlet, th e female pelvis is divided into four parent types 
 Gynecoid (50%)  
 Anthropoid (25%) ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
21   
  Android (20%)  
 Platypelloid (5%) 
 
46. Advantage of transvaginal ultrasound over trans abdominal ultrasound is all except: 
a.  Full bladder is not required 
b.  Better resolution and image of pelvic organs 
c.  In obese women, sound waves are attenuated by subcu taneous fat, and TAS gives a poor image 
d.  Can be performed with transabdominal probes 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Shaw Gynecology 16th Edition, Page No: 117 
Advantages of TVS over TAS are as follows:  
 Full bladder is not required.  
 Better resolution and image of pelvic organs.  
 In obese women, sound waves are attenuated by subcu taneous fat, and TAS gives a poor image.  
 
47. Ovary starts to develop by: 
a.  2nd  week 
b.  5th  week 
c.  9th  week 
d.  12 th  week 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Shaw Gynecology 16th Edition, Page No: 125 
Ovary starts to develop by the fifth week. The ovar ian differentiation is determined by the presence o f a determinant 
located on the gene of the short arm of X-sex chrom osome though the autosomes are also involved in the  ovarian 
development. Two intact sex chromosomes (XX) are ne cessary for the development of the ovaries. 
 
48. Gold standard in the diagnosis of genuine stres s incontinence is: 
a.  Micturition Cystourethrography 
b.  Videocystourethrography  
c.  Ultrasound 
d.  Cystometry 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Shaw Gynecology 16th Edition, Page No: 229 
Uroprofilometry  measures the dynamic urethral pressures and diagno ses urethral instability and urethral diverticulum.  It 
is a gold standard in the diagnosis of Genuine stre ss incontinence.   
The normal flow is 15–25 mL/s. Flow below 10 mL/s o ccurs in atonic bladder and in obstruction, which i s confirmed by 
cystometry. Increased bladder pressure .50 cm water  and low flow suggests obstruction. 
Videocystourethrography: Videocystourethrography is  the new gold standard urodynamic investigation to study the 
lower urinary tract dysfunction.  It combines the pressure studies with the video po sition of the bladder neck and 
urethrovesical angle. 
 
Pediatrics ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
22   
 49. Which of the following muscle is measured in an thropometry? 
a.  Biceps 
b.  Triceps 
c.  Deltoid 
d.  Gluteus maximus 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Short Textbook of Pediatrics, Suraj Gupte, 11 th  Edition, Page No: 131 
 Triceps skin fold thickness is measured by a standard caliper (Lange, Herpenden  or Best).  
 Tanner chart gives the normal values at different a ges.  
 On an average it exceeds 10 mm in 1 to 6 years age group. 
 A measurement between 6 to 10 mm points to mild-mod erate malnutrition and under 6 mm to severe 
malnutrition. 
 
50. Which of the following is not a minimal diagnos tic criterion for Kwashiorkor? 
a.  Growth retardation 
b.  Hair changes (Flag sign) 
c.  Muscle wasting 
d.  Psychomotor change 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Short Textbook of Pediatrics, Suraj Gupte, 11t h Edition, Page No: 141 
Kwashiorkor 
Essential Features (Minimal Diagnostic Criteria) 
 Growth retardation as evidenced by low weight and l ow height, 
 Muscle wasting with retention of some subcutaneous fat, 
 Psychomotor change as evidenced by mental apathy in  the form of silent listless inertness, lack of int erest in the 
surroundings, 
 Hypoalbuminemic pitting edema, at least over the pr etibial region. Serum albumin should be less than 2 .5 g/dl and 
cardiac, hepatic, renal and angioneurotic causes of  edema should be ruled out.  
 
51. Megalocornea means cornea of size more than: 
a.  7 mm 
b.  9 mm 
c.  13 mm 
d.  17 mm 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: Short Textbook of Pediatrics, Suraj Gupte, 11t h Edition, Page No: 672 
 A cornea of more than 13 mm diameter, often familia l and associated with other developmental disorders  
(osteogenesis imperfecta, Marfan syndrome), is usua lly accompanied by refractive errors.  
 In adults, there is high incidence of glaucoma, sub luxation of lens and premature development of catar acts. 
 
52. Trisomy 13 is: 
a.  Down syndrome ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
23   b.  Patau syndrome 
c.  Edward syndrome 
d.  Turner syndrome 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Short Textbook of Pediatrics, Suraj Gupte, 11t h Edition, Page No: 646 
 
 
53. A one-week-old, full- term infant born by 
who notes that her daughter's skin appears yellow. She reports that the child cries several times per day and sleeps 7 
hours at night, uninterrupted. She has been breastf eeding e 
the following is the best treatment for this condit ion? 
a.  Phototherapy 
b.  Phenobarbital administration 
c.  Plasma exchange 
d.  Continue normal breast feeding 
 
Ans: d 
The infant in this vignette most likely has breast milk jaundice. No intervention is needed , and the mother does not need 
to stop breast feeding. 
Breast milk jaundice occurs because the infant live r is not mature enough to process lipids. It presen ts between the 4th 
and 7th day of life. If breas t feeding stops, bilirubin levels fall rapidly; how ever, if breast feeding continues, bilirubin levels  
will fall slowly. Distinct from breast milk jaundic e, breastfeeding jaundice is the most common cause of neonatal jaundice 
in the first week of life and occurs in 10% of births. It is characterized by ins ufficient feeding, which leads to fewer bowel 
movements and, therefore, decreased bilirubin clear ance. The infant in this vignette has been breastfe eding normally. 
 
Ref: Short Textbook of Pediatrics, Suraj Gupte, 11t h Edition, Page No: 646  
term infant born by  uncomplicated vaginal delivery is brought to a pedi atrician by his mother, 
who notes that her daughter's skin appears yellow. She reports that the child cries several times per day and sleeps 7 
hours at night, uninterrupted. She has been breastf eeding e xclusively and feels that he has been feeding well.  Which of 
the following is the best treatment for this condit ion?  
has breast milk jaundice. No intervention is needed , and the mother does not need 
Breast milk jaundice occurs because the infant live r is not mature enough to process lipids. It presen ts between the 4th 
t feeding stops, bilirubin levels fall rapidly; how ever, if breast feeding continues, bilirubin levels  
will fall slowly. Distinct from breast milk jaundic e, breastfeeding jaundice is the most common cause of neonatal jaundice 
occurs in 10% of births. It is characterized by ins ufficient feeding, which leads to fewer bowel 
movements and, therefore, decreased bilirubin clear ance. The infant in this vignette has been breastfe eding normally. QAE FALGUN 8  
 uncomplicated vaginal delivery is brought to a pedi atrician by his mother, 
who notes that her daughter's skin appears yellow. She reports that the child cries several times per day and sleeps 7 -8 
xclusively and feels that he has been feeding well.  Which of 
has breast milk jaundice. No intervention is needed , and the mother does not need 
Breast milk jaundice occurs because the infant live r is not mature enough to process lipids. It presen ts between the 4th 
t feeding stops, bilirubin levels fall rapidly; how ever, if breast feeding continues, bilirubin levels  
will fall slowly. Distinct from breast milk jaundic e, breastfeeding jaundice is the most common cause of neonatal jaundice 
occurs in 10% of births. It is characterized by ins ufficient feeding, which leads to fewer bowel 
movements and, therefore, decreased bilirubin clear ance. The infant in this vignette has been breastfe eding normally.  ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
24   
 54. A 7-month-old boy presents to the emergency roo m with three episodes of vomiting and severe abdomi nal pain 
that comes and goes for the past two hours. The pat ient's most recent vomit in the hospital appears bi lious, and the 
patient had one stool that appears bloody and full of mucous. The mother explains that one stool at ho me appear to be 
"jelly-like." On physical exam, a palpable mass is felt in the right lower quadrant of the abdomen. Wh at is the next best 
diagnostic test for this patient? 
a.  Peripheral blood culture 
b.  Kidney, ureter, bladder radiograph 
c.  Abdominal ultrasound 
d.  Exploratory laparotomy 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: Short Textbook of Pediatrics, Suraj Gupte, 11t h Edition, Page No: 698 
 The patient has symptoms most consistent with intus susception. The next and most sensitive and specifi c 
diagnostic test would be an abdominal ultrasound. 
 Intussusception is a process where a segment of the  intestine slides into the adjacent intestinal lume n causing 
bowel obstruction. A combination of abdominal pain,  "currant-jelly" stools (blood and mucous), vomitin g, and an 
abdominal mass suggest intussusception.  
 The best initial diagnostic test is an abdominal ul trasound ; however, despite being less sensitive and specifi c, 
abdominal radiographs may also reveal intussuscepti on. 
 
55. Common length of Meckel’s diverticulum is: 
a.  2 cm 
b.  5 cm 
c.  7 cm 
d.  9 cm 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Short Textbook of Pediatrics, Suraj Gupte, 11t h Edition, Page No: 700 
Meckel’s diverticulum 
Abnormal persistence of embryologic vitellointestin al duct results in Meckel’s diverticulum. It is see n in 2% of population, 
2 ft (60 cm) from the ileocecal junction, is genera lly 2 inch (5 cm) long, containing heterotopic panc reatic tissue in 2% 
cases and is often symptomatic before 2 years of ag e. 
 
56. Neuroblastoma arises from: 
a.  Sympathetic ganglia  
b.  Adrenal cortex 
c.  Upper pole of kidney 
d.  All of the above 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Short Textbook of Pediatrics, Suraj Gupte, 11t h Edition, Page No: 563 
Neuroblastoma 
 It is a malignant tumor arising from sympathetic ga nglia or adrenal medulla. 
 The common locations of neuroblastoma are the abdom en and chest. 
 Early metastases constitute the hallmark of the dis ease. ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
25    
57. Cause of Down’s syndrome is: 
a.  Trisomy 
b.  Translocation 
c.  Mosaicism  
d.  All of the above 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Short Textbook of Pediatrics, Suraj Gupte, 11t h Edition, Page No: 410 
Down syndrome is perhaps the most common among the well 
Three types are known: 
 Trisomy 21 (95% cases) which results from the presence of a n extra 
chromosomes instead of the normal 46. Also called 
mongol is generally either first born or an exhaust ion product, i.e. last of a series of pregnancies. 
 Translocation of chromosome 21 with chromosome 13, 14 or 15 (4% c ases). In this type the total number r 
the normal 46 though one chromosome is large and at ypical. 
 Occasionally (1% cases), mosaicism may occur. 
 
58. Childhood tuberculosis is different from adult tuberculosis because: 
a.  Glandular involvement is common 
b.  Hematogenous dissemination is uncommon 
c.  Common heal by fibrosis 
d.  Cavitations are common 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Short Textbook of Pediatrics, Suraj Gupte, 11t h Edition, Page No: 343 
 
59. Pneumatocele is chest X- ray is classically associated with infection of: 
a.  Staphylococcus aureus 
b.  Group A streptococci 
c.  Adenovirus 
d.  Corona virus 
 
Ref: Short Textbook of Pediatrics, Suraj Gupte, 11t h Edition, Page No: 410  
the most common among the well -recognized causes of mental retardation. 
21 (95% cases) which results from the presence of a n extra -chromosome 21. Such a mongol has 47 
chromosomes instead of the normal 46. Also called Trisomy G , it is associated with advancing maternal age. A 
mongol is generally either first born or an exhaust ion product, i.e. last of a series of pregnancies. 
of chromosome 21 with chromosome 13, 14 or 15 (4% c ases). In this type the total number r 
the normal 46 though one chromosome is large and at ypical.  
may occur.  
58. Childhood tuberculosis is different from adult tuberculosis because:  
Hematogenous dissemination is uncommon  
Ref: Short Textbook of Pediatrics, Suraj Gupte, 11t h Edition, Page No: 343  
 
ray is classically associated with infection of:  
QAE FALGUN 8  
 recognized causes of mental retardation.  
chromosome 21. Such a mongol has 47 
, it is associated with advancing maternal age. A 
mongol is generally either first born or an exhaust ion product, i.e. last of a series of pregnancies.  
of chromosome 21 with chromosome 13, 14 or 15 (4% c ases). In this type the total number r emains ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
26   
 Ans: a 
Ref: Short Textbook of Pediatrics, Suraj Gupte, 11t h Edition, Page No: 329 
Demonstration of pneumatoceles is regarded pathogno monic of staphylococcal pneumonia. 
 
60. A male toddler presented with difficulty in wal king. There was history of recurrent falls and foll owing that on 
examination warmth and swelling of knee joint found . Most probable diagnosis is: 
a.  Scurvy  
b.  Hemophilia 
c.  Septic arthritis 
d.  Rheumatic fever 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: OP Ghai Pediatrics 9th Edition, Page No: 351 
Hemophilia: 
 Commonest hereditary clotting deficiency 
 X-linked recessive disorders 
 Hemophilia A  due to factor VIII deficiency  
 Hemophilia B due to insufficient factor IX 
Clinical features of hemophilia A and B are indisti nguishable 
 In mild cases the factor level is enough to prevent  minor spontaneous bleeds and the children only man ifest, if 
they have surgery or severe trauma.  
 In severe cases where factor levels are less than 1  %, repeated, spontaneous, debilitating joint bleed s lead to 
severe handicap and intracranial bleeds can be life -threatening.  
Treatment: 
 Replacement therapy with concentrates of factor VII I or IX 
 Judicious physiotherapy to prevent chronic joint di sease, 
 Counseling for injury prevention and  
 Monitoring for inhibitor development.  
 
ENT 
61. Atticoantral chronic suppurative otitis media h as: 
a.  Benign type 
b.  Safe course 
c.  Central perforation 
d.  Bone erosion 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: PL Dhingra and Shruti Dhingra ENT and HNS 7th Edition, Page No: 75 
Chronic suppurative otitis media types: 
 Tubotympanic. Also called the safe or benign type; it involves anteroinferior part of middle ear cleft , i.e. 
eustachian tube and mesotympanum and is associated with a central perforation. There is no risk of ser ious 
complications. 
 Atticoantral. Also called unsafe or dangerous type;  it involves posterosuperior part of the cleft (i.e . attic, antrum 
and mastoid) and is associated with an attic or a m arginal perforation. The disease is often associate d with a bone-
eroding process such as cholesteatoma, granulations  or osteitis. Risk of complications is high in this  variety. ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
27   
  
62. In Luc abscess, pus burst into: 
a.  Meatus 
b.  Mastoid 
c.  Behind the mastoid 
d.  Neck 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: PL Dhingra and Shruti Dhingra ENT and HNS 7th Edition, Page No: 87 
Bezold Abscess   
It can occur following acute coalescent mastoiditis  when pus breaks through the thin medial side of th e tip of the mastoid 
and presents as a swelling in the upper part of nec k. 
Meatal Abscess (Luc Abscess) 
In this case, pus breaks through the bony wall betw een the antrum and external osseous meatus. Swellin g is seen in deep 
part of bony meatus. Abscess may burst into the mea tus. 
Behind the Mastoid (Citelli’s Abscess) 
Abscess is formed behind the mastoid more towards t he occipital bone (compare postauricular mastoid ab scess which 
forms over the mastoid). Some authors consider abscess of the digastric triangle, which is formed by tracking of pus from 
the mastoid tip, as the Citelli’s abscess. 
 
63. Which of the following is neonatal hearing scre ening procedure? 
a.  ABR/OAEs 
b.  Moro’s reflex 
c.  Cessation reflex 
d.  Visual reinforcement audiometry 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: PL Dhingra and Shruti Dhingra ENT and HNS 7th Edition, Page No: 132 
Methods of hearing assessment in infants and childr en 
Neonatal screening procedures 
• ABR/OAEs 
• Arousal test 
• Auditory response cradle 
Behaviour observation audiometry 
• Moro’s reflex 
• Cochleopalpebral reflex 
• Cessation reflex 
Distraction techniques (6–18 months) 
Conditioning techniques (7 months – 2 years) 
• Visual reinforcement audiometry 
• Play audiometry (2–5 years) 
Objective tests 
• ABR 
• Otoacoustic emissions 
• Impedance audiometry ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
28    
Two important tests are to study otoacoustic emissi ons (OAEs) and auditory brainstem responses (ABR) 
• OAEs are generated at outer hair cells and can be p icked up from the external ear as the energy produc ed by them 
travels in reverse direction from outer hair cells 
up. OAEs are absent if outer hair cells in the cochlea are nonfunctional or ther e is middle ear effusion or canal 
debris due to meconium which may persist for 3 
Thus can be used in the diagnosis of neuropathy of VIIIth 
• ABRs are generated in response to sound stimulus pr esented to the ear and picked up from the scalp. Wi th a 
response of 30– 35 dB nHL, the infant who passes the test and the h earing is considered normal. Infants who fail 
these tests are followed up wi th repeat tests. 
 
64. Taste of CSF rhinorrhea is: 
a.  Sweet 
b.  Salty 
c.  Bitter 
d.  No taste 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: PL Dhingra and Shruti Dhingra ENT and HNS 7th Edition, Page No: 183, 184 
CSF rhinorrhea: Leakage of CSF into the nose is cal led CSF rhinorrhoea. It may be clear 
acute head injuries. 
 
65. Black line across the middle of dorsum of nose i s seen in: 
a.  BCC 
b.  Allergic rhinitis 
c.  Vasomotor rhinitis 
d.  Eczema 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: PL Dhingra and Shruti Dhingra ENT and HNS 7th Edition, Page No: 187, 188 
Signs of allergic rhinitis: 
 Nasal signs include transverse nasal crease 
upward rubbing of nose simulating a salute ( 
appear bluish. Tu rbinates are swollen. Thin, watery or mucoid discha rge is usually present. 
 Ocular signs include oedema of lids, congestion and  cobble 
under the eyes ( allergic shiners ). 
Two important tests are to study otoacoustic emissi ons (OAEs) and auditory brainstem responses (ABR) 
OAEs are generated at outer hair cells and can be p icked up from the external ear as the energy produc ed by them 
travels in reverse direction from outer hair cells → ossicles → tympanic membrane → ear canal where it  is picked 
hair cells in the cochlea are nonfunctional or ther e is middle ear effusion or canal 
debris due to meconium which may persist for 3 –4 days. They are normal even when VIIIth nerve is n onfunctional. 
Thus can be used in the diagnosis of neuropathy of VIIIth nerve. 
ABRs are generated in response to sound stimulus pr esented to the ear and picked up from the scalp. Wi th a 
35 dB nHL, the infant who passes the test and the h earing is considered normal. Infants who fail 
th repeat tests.  
Ref: PL Dhingra and Shruti Dhingra ENT and HNS 7th Edition, Page No: 183, 184  
CSF rhinorrhea: Leakage of CSF into the nose is cal led CSF rhinorrhoea. It may be clear fluid or mixed with blood as in 
5. Black line across the middle of dorsum of nose i s seen in:  
Ref: PL Dhingra and Shruti Dhingra ENT and HNS 7th Edition, Page No: 187, 188  
Nasal signs include transverse nasal crease —a black line across the middle of dorsum of nose du e to constant 
upward rubbing of nose simulating a salute ( allergic salute ), pale and oedematous nasal mucosa which may 
rbinates are swollen. Thin, watery or mucoid discha rge is usually present. 
Ocular signs include oedema of lids, congestion and  cobble -stone appearance of the conjunctiva, and dark circl es 
QAE FALGUN 8  
 Two important tests are to study otoacoustic emissi ons (OAEs) and auditory brainstem responses (ABR) . 
OAEs are generated at outer hair cells and can be p icked up from the external ear as the energy produc ed by them 
→ ossicles → tympanic membrane → ear canal where it  is picked 
hair cells in the cochlea are nonfunctional or ther e is middle ear effusion or canal 
4 days. They are normal even when VIIIth nerve is n onfunctional. 
ABRs are generated in response to sound stimulus pr esented to the ear and picked up from the scalp. Wi th a 
35 dB nHL, the infant who passes the test and the h earing is considered normal. Infants who fail 
fluid or mixed with blood as in 
 
a black line across the middle of dorsum of nose du e to constant 
), pale and oedematous nasal mucosa which may 
rbinates are swollen. Thin, watery or mucoid discha rge is usually present.  
stone appearance of the conjunctiva, and dark circl es 
ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
29   
  Otologic signs include retracted tympanic membrane or serous otitis media as a result of eustachian tu be 
blockage. 
 Pharyngeal signs include granular pharyngitis due t o hyperplasia of submucosal lymphoid tissue. A chil d with 
perennial allergic rhinitis may show all the featur es of prolonged mouth breathing as seen in adenoid hyperplasia. 
 Laryngeal signs include hoarseness and oedema of th e vocal cords. 
 
66. Craniofacial dysfunction is seen in Le Fort: 
a.  I 
b.  II 
c.  III 
d.  IV 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: PL Dhingra and Shruti Dhingra ENT and HNS 7th Edition, Page No: 207 
Fractures of maxilla 
They are classified into three types: 
1.  Le Fort I (transverse) fracture runs above and para llel to the palate. It crosses lower part of nasal septum, 
maxillary antra and the pterygoid plates. 
2.  Le Fort II (pyramidal) fracture passes through the root of nose, lacrimal bone, floor of orbit, upper part of maxillary 
sinus and pterygoid plates. This fracture has some features common with the zygomatic fractures. 
3.  Le Fort III (craniofacial dysjunction). There is co mplete separation of facial bones from the cranial bones. The 
fracture line passes through root of nose, ethmofro ntal junction, superior orbital fissure, lateral wa ll of orbit, 
frontozygomatic and temporozygomatic sutures and th e upper part of pterygoid plates. 
 
67. Paranasal sinus of posterior group is: 
a.  Maxillary sinus 
b.  Frontal sinus 
c.  Anterior ethmoidal sinus 
d.  Sphenoid sinus  
 
Ans: d 
Ref: PL Dhingra and Shruti Dhingra ENT and HNS 7th Edition, Page No: 209 
Paranasal sinuses are air-containing cavities in ce rtain bones of skull. They are four on each side. C linically, paranasal 
sinuses have been divided into two groups: 
 Anterior group: This includes maxillary, frontal an d anterior ethmoidal. They all open in the middle m eatus and 
their ostia lie anterior to basal lamella of middle  turbinate. 
 Posterior group: This includes posterior ethmoidal sinuses which open in the superior meatus and the s phenoid 
sinus which opens in sphenoethmoidal recess. 
 
68. Commonest site for osteoma in paransal sinus is : 
a.  Frontal sinus 
b.  Maxillary sinus 
c.  Ethmoid sinus 
d.  Sphenoid sinus 
 ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
30   
 Ans: a 
Ref: PL Dhingra and Shruti Dhingra ENT and HNS 7th Edition, Page No: 231 
Osteomas 
 They are most commonly seen in the frontal sinus fo llowed in turn by those of ethmoid and maxillary.  
 They may remain asymptomatic, being discovered inci dentally on X-rays.  
 Treatment is indicated when they become symptomatic , causing obstruction to the sinus ostium, formatio n of 
mucocele, pressure symptoms due to their growth in the orbit, nose or cranium. 
 
69. Kashima operation is: 
a.  Transverse cordotomy  
b.  Partial arytenoidectomy 
c.  Reinnervation procedure 
d.  Cordectomy 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: PL Dhingra and Shruti Dhingra ENT and HNS 7th Edition, Page No: 339 
Transverse cordotomy (Kashima operation) 
Soft tissue at the junction of membranous cord and vocal process of arytenoid is excised laterally wit h laser. This provides 
good airway. In case airway is still insufficient m ore tissue can be removed at subsequent operation. 
 
70. Hypermotility disorder of esophagus is: 
a.  Nut cracker oesophagus 
b.  Cardiac achalasia 
c.  Gastroesophageal reflux 
d.  Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: PL Dhingra and Shruti Dhingra ENT and HNS 7th Edition, Page No: 389 
 Hypermotility disorder, e.g. cricopharyngeal spasm,  diffuse oesophageal spasm, nut cracker oesophagus.  
 Hypomotility disorders, e.g. cardiac achalasia, gas troesophageal reflux, scleroderma, amyotrophic late ral sclerosis. 
 
Orthopedics 
71. The cardinal signs of osteoarthritis includes a ll except: 
a.  Narrowing of the ‘joint space’ 
b.  Subchondral sclerosis 
c.  Marginal osteophytes 
d.  Periarticular osteopenia 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Apley Orthopedics; 9th Edition, Page No: 5 
The cardinal signs of osteoarthritis 
 Narrowing of the ‘joint space’ 
 Subchondral sclerosis 
 Marginal osteophytes 
 Subchondral cysts ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
31   
  Bone remodelling 
 
72. In x-ray, how much destruction of the single co rtex of a long bone warrants pathological fracture?  
a.  10 % 
b.  25 % 
c.  40 % 
d.  50 % 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Apley Orthopedics; 9th Edition, Page No: 218 
 Large deposits that threaten to result in fracture should be treated by internal fixation while the bo ne is still intact.  
 As a rule of thumb, where 50 per cent of a single c ortex of a long bone (in any radiological view) has  been 
destroyed, pathological fracture should be regarded  as inevitable.  
 In addition, avulsion of the lesser trochanter is a n indication of imminent hip fracture. 
 
73. Nerve root supplying the action of toe extensio n is: 
a.  L2 
b.  L4 
c.  L5 
d.  S1 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: Apley Orthopedics; 9th Edition, Page No: 229 ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
32    
74. Crutch palsy is an example of: 
a.  Axonotmesis  
b.  Neurotmesis 
c.  Neurapraxia 
d.  Neurulation 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: Apley Orthopedics; 9th Edition, Page No: 270 
Neurapraxia 
 Seddon (1942) coined the term ‘neurapraxia 
which there is loss of some types of sensation and mu 
days or weeks.  
 It is due to mechanical pressure causing segmental demyelination and is seen typically in 
pressure paralysis in states of drunkenness 
 
75. UHMWPE is used for: 
 
Ref: Apley Orthopedics; 9th Edition, Page No: 270  
neurapraxia ’ to describe a reversible physiological nerve conduc tion block in 
which there is loss of some types of sensation and mu scle power followed by spontaneous recovery after a  few 
It is due to mechanical pressure causing segmental demyelination and is seen typically in 
pressure paralysis in states of drunkenness (‘Saturday night palsy’ ) and the m ilder types of tourniquet palsy. 
QAE FALGUN 8  
 to describe a reversible physiological nerve conduc tion block in 
scle power followed by spontaneous recovery after a  few 
It is due to mechanical pressure causing segmental demyelination and is seen typically in ‘crutch palsy ’, 
ilder types of tourniquet palsy.  ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
33   
 a.  Prosthesis 
b.  Cement 
c.  Plaster 
d.  Dressing 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Apley Orthopedics; 9th Edition, Page No: 330, 331 
 Ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) i s an inert thermoplastic polymer. Its density is cl ose to that 
of the low-density polyethylenes but the very high molecular weight provides increased strength and we ar 
resistance over other types of polyethylene.  
 The material is manufactured for hip (acetabular cu p) and knee (tibial tray) prostheses and sterilized  by gamma 
irradiation.  
 The latter process was noted to cause oxidation of the material and detrimentally alter its physical a nd chemical 
properties to the extent that a ‘shelf life’ for th e component was created. 
 
In joint replacement the prostheses are often fixed  to the bone with acrylic cement (polymethylmethacr ylate – PMMA), 
which acts as a grouting material. It is usually pr esented as a liquid (the PMMA monomer) and powder ( the PMMA 
polymer plus copolymers or other additives), which is mixed to set off an exothermic reaction of polym erization. 
 
76. Treatment of Gun-Stock’ deformity is: 
a.  Circular osteotomy 
b.  Wedge osteotomy 
c.  Linear osteotomy 
d.  Focused osteotomy 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Apley Orthopedics; 9th Edition, Page No: 371 
Cubitus Varus (‘Gun-Stock’ Deformity) 
 The deformity is most obvious when the elbow is ext ended and the arms are elevated. The most common ca use is 
malunion of a supracondylar fracture. 
 The deformity can be corrected by a wedge osteotomy  of the lower humerus but this is best left until s keletal 
maturity. 
 
77. In intervertebral disc: 
a.  Central part is annulus fibrosus  
b.  Central part is avascular 
c.  Peripheral part contains nucleus pulposus  
d.  Central part contains concentric fibrous tissues 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Apley Orthopedics; 9th Edition, Page No: 489 
INTERVERTEBRAL DISC 
The disc consists of a central avascular nucleus pu lposus – a hydrophilic gel made of protein-polysacc haride, collagen 
fibres, sparse chondroid cells and water (88 per ce nt), surrounded by concentric layers of fibrous tis sue – the annulus 
fibrosus.  ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
34   
 If the physicochemical state of the nucleus pulposu s is normal, the disc can withstand almost any load  that the muscles 
can support; if it is abnormal, even small increase s in force can produce sufficient stress to rupture  the annulus. 
 
78. Clergyman’s Knee is: 
a.  Prepatellar Bursitis 
b.  Infrapatellar Bursitis 
c.  Popliteal bursitis 
d.  Suprapatellar bursitis 
 
Ans : b 
Ref: Apley Orthopedics; 9th Edition, Page No: 578 
Prepatellar Bursitis (‘Housemaid’s Knee’) 
 The fluctuant swelling is confined to the front of the patella and the joint itself is normal.  
 This is an uninfected bursitis due not to pressure but to constant friction between skin and bone. It is seen mainly 
in carpet layers, paving workers, floor cleaners an d miners who do not use protective knee pads.  
 Treatment consists of firm bandaging, and kneeling is avoided; occasionally aspiration is needed. In c hronic cases 
the lump is best excised. 
 Infection (possibly due to foreign body implantatio n) results in a warm, tender swelling. Treatment is  by rest, 
antibiotics and, if necessary, aspiration or excisi on. 
Infrapatellar Bursitis (‘Clergyman’s Knee’) 
 The swelling is below the patella and superficial t o the patellar ligament, being more distally placed  than 
prepatellar bursitis; it used to be said that one w ho prays kneels more uprightly than one who scrubs!  
 Treatment is similar to that for prepatellar bursit is. 
 Occasionally the bursa is affected in gout. 
 
79. Downward-arched forefoot is: 
a.  Pes valgus 
b.  Pes cavus 
c.  Pes plantaris 
d.  Hallux valgus 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: Apley Orthopedics; 9th Edition, Page No: 589 
A foot that is set flat on the ground at a right an gle to the tibia is described as plantigrade ; if it is set in fixed plantarflexion 
(pointing downwards) it is said to be in equinus ; a dorsiflexed position is called calcaneus .  
Common defects are a ‘flat-footed ’ stance ( pes valgus ); an abnormally high instep ( pes cavus ); a downward-arched 
forefoot ( pes plantaris ); lateral deviation of the great toe ( hallux valgus ); fixed flexion of a single interphalangeal (IP) j oint 
(hammer toe ) or of all the toes ( claw toes ). 
 
80. In Glasgow Coma Score, confused patient is give n a verbal response score of: 
a.  2 
b.  3 
c.  4 
d.  5 
 ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
35   Ans: c 
Ref: Apley Orthopedics; 9th Edition, Page No: 638 
 
Ophthalmology 
81.  What is the location of neurons of second order of visual sensation? 
a.  Amacrine cell layer of retina  
b.  Bipolar cell layer of the retina 
c.  Ganglion cell layer of retina 
d.  Geniculate body  
 
Ans: C, Ganglion cell layer of retina 
Ref: Khurana Ophthalmology, 6 th  edition, page 312 
 
82.  How does the lens utilize glucose for its metabolic  n 
a.  Glycolysis  
b.  HMP shunt 
c.  Sorbitol pathway 
d.  TCA cycle  
 
Ans: A, Glycolysis  
Ref: Apley Orthopedics; 9th Edition, Page No: 638  
 
What is the location of neurons of second order of visual sensation?  
 
Bipolar cell layer of the retina  
edition, page 312  
 
How does the lens utilize glucose for its metabolic  n eeds? 
QAE FALGUN 8  
 ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
36   Ref: Khurana Ophthalmology, 6 th  edition, page 181 
 Glucose is very essential for the normal working of  the lens. Metabolic activity of the lens is largel y limited 
to epithelium and cortex, while the nucleus is relatively inert. Path ways of glucose metabolism in the lens 
are as follows: 
o Glycolytic pathway. In the lens, 80% glucose is met abolised anaerobically by this pathway. 
o Pentose, Hexose, Monophosphate (HMP) shunt is respo nsible 
o Kreb’s citric acid cycle metabolises only a small p roportion by the oxidative process. 
o Sorbitol pathway is relatively inconsequential in t he normal lens; however, it is extremely 
important in the production of cataract in 
 
83.  Nuclear inclusion bodies are present in which type of conjunctivitis? 
a.  Allergic 
b.  Bacterial  
c.  Chlamydial  
d.  Viral  
 
Ans: D, Viral  
Ref: Khurana Ophthalmology, 6 th  edition, page 64 
 
84.  Which of the following has surface ectodermal origi n? 
a.  Choroidal stroma  
b.  Ciliary epithelium 
c.  Lacrimal glands   
d.  Sclera  
 
edition, page 181  
Glucose is very essential for the normal working of  the lens. Metabolic activity of the lens is largel y limited 
cortex, while the nucleus is relatively inert. Path ways of glucose metabolism in the lens 
Glycolytic pathway. In the lens, 80% glucose is met abolised anaerobically by this pathway. 
Pentose, Hexose, Monophosphate (HMP) shunt is respo nsible for metabolism of 15% of glucose. 
Kreb’s citric acid cycle metabolises only a small p roportion by the oxidative process. 
Sorbitol pathway is relatively inconsequential in t he normal lens; however, it is extremely 
important in the production of cataract in diabetic and galactosemic patients. 
Nuclear inclusion bodies are present in which type of conjunctivitis?  
edition, page 64  
Which of the following has surface ectodermal origi n?  
QAE FALGUN 8  
 Glucose is very essential for the normal working of  the lens. Metabolic activity of the lens is largel y limited 
cortex, while the nucleus is relatively inert. Path ways of glucose metabolism in the lens 
Glycolytic pathway. In the lens, 80% glucose is met abolised anaerobically by this pathway.  
for metabolism of 15% of glucose.  
Kreb’s citric acid cycle metabolises only a small p roportion by the oxidative process.  
Sorbitol pathway is relatively inconsequential in t he normal lens; however, it is extremely 
diabetic and galactosemic patients.  
 
ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
37   Ans: C, Lacrimal glands  
Ref: Parson’s Diseases of the Eye, 22 nd  edition, page 6 
 
85.  What is the rotational movement around the 
eyes tilts towards the right known as? 
a.  Dextro cycloversion 
b.  Dextro elevation 
c.  Levo cycloversion 
d.  Supra version  
 
Ans: A, Dextro cycloversion 
Ref: Khurana Ophthalmology, 6 th  edition, page 339 
 Binocular movements. These are of two types: version s and vergences. 
edition, page 6  
 
What is the rotational movement around the anteroposterior axis, in which superior pole of cor nea of both the 
eyes tilts towards the right known as?  
edition, page 339  
inocular movements. These are of two types: version s and vergences.  
QAE FALGUN 8  
 anteroposterior axis, in which superior pole of cor nea of both the ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
38   
  a. Versions, also known as conjugate movements, are  synchronous (simultaneous) symmetric 
movements of both eyes in the same direction. These  include: 
o 1. Dextroversion. It is the movement of botheyes to  the right. It results due to simultaneous 
contraction of right lateral rectus and left medial  rectus. 
o 2. Levoversion. It refers to movement of both eyes to the left. It is produced by simultaneous 
contraction of left lateral rectus and right medial  rectus. 
o 3. Supraversion. It is upward movement of both eyes  in primary position. It results due to 
simultaneous contraction of bilateral superior rect i and inferior obliques. 
o 4. Infraversion. It is downward movement of both ey es in primary position. It results due to 
simultaneous contraction of bilateral inferior rect i and superior obliques. 
o 5. Dextroelevation. It is movement to the right and  upside. It is caused by simultaneous action of 
right superior rectus and left inferior oblique. 
o Dextrodepression. It is movement to the right and d own side. It is caused by simultaneous action 
of right inferior rectus and left superior oblique.  
o 7. Levoelevation. It is movement to the left and up side. It is caused by simultaneous action of left 
superior rectus and right inferior oblique. 
o 8. Levodepression. It is movement to the left and d own side. It is caused by simultaneous action of 
left inferior rectus and right superior oblique. 
o 9. Dextrocycloversion. It is rotational movement ar ound the anteroposterior axis, in which 
superior pole of cornea of both the eyes tilts towa rds the right. 
o 10. Levocycloversion. It is just the reverse of dex trocycloversion. In this superior pole of cornea of  
both the eyes tilts towards the left. 
 b. Vergences, also called disconjugate movements, a re synchronous and symmetric movements of both 
eyes in opposite directions e.g.: 
o 1. Convergence. It is simultaneous inward movement of both eyes which results from contraction 
of the medial recti. 
o 2. Divergence. It is simultaneous outward movement of both eyes produced by contraction of the 
lateral recti. 
 
 
86.  Which organism causes ulcus serpens of cornea? 
a.  Haemophilus  
b.  Moraxella  
c.  Pneumococcus  
d.  Pseudomonas  
 
Ans: C, Pneumococcus 
Ref: Khurana Ophthalmology, 6 th  edition, page 102 
 It is customary to reserve the term ‘hypopyon corne al ulcer’ for the characteristic ulcer caused by 
Pneumococcus and the term ‘corneal ulcer with hypop yon’ for the ulcers associated with hypopyon due to  
other organisms such as Staphylococci, Streptococci , Gonococci, Moraxella and Pseudomonas pyocyanea. 
 The characteristic hypopyon corneal ulcer caused by  Pneumococcus is called ulcus serpens. 
 
 
87.  What is not a feature of secondary optic atrophy? ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
39   a.  Dirty grey white appearance of fundus 
b.  Drusen surrounding retina  
c.  Peripapillary sheathing  
d.  Well defined margins  
 
Ans: D, Well defined margins  
Ref: Khurana Ophthalmology, 6 th  edition, page 329 
 
Anesthesiology 
88.  Where is TAP block given? 
a.  In the fascial sheath above external oblique muscle  
b.  In the fascial sheath deep to the external oblique 
c.  In the fascial sheath deep to the internal oblique muscle and superficial to the transversus abdominis  
muscle 
d.  In the fascial sheath deep to the transversus abdom inis muscle 
 
Ans: C, In the fascial shea th deep to the internal oblique muscle and superfic ial to the transversus abdominis muscle 
Ref: Ajay Yadav Anesthesia, 6 th  edition, page 271 
 Transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block: TAP block is very effective to produce analgesia for abdomina l 
surgeries such as cesarean section, hernia repair, etc. 
 TAP block is given in the fascial sheath deep to th e internal oblique muscle and superficial to the 
transversus abdominis muscle. 
 
89.  What is false about Mallampati grading? 
a.  Done to assess mouth opening 
b.  Faucial pillars are seen in grade I 
c.  Only soft palate is seen in grade III 
d.  Oral intubation can be done with difficulty in grad e II 
 
Ans: D, Oral intubation can be done with difficulty  in grade II 
Ref: Ajay Yadav, Short Textbook of Anesthesia, 6 
Dirty grey white appearance of fundus  
edition, page 329  
 
In the fascial sheath above external oblique muscle   
In the fascial sheath deep to the external oblique  muscle and superficial to the internal oblique musc le 
In the fascial sheath deep to the internal oblique muscle and superficial to the transversus abdominis  
In the fascial sheath deep to the transversus abdom inis muscle  
th deep to the internal oblique muscle and superfic ial to the transversus abdominis muscle 
edition, page 271  
Transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block: TAP block is very effective to produce analgesia for abdomina l 
such as cesarean section, hernia repair, etc.  
TAP block is given in the fascial sheath deep to th e internal oblique muscle and superficial to the 
transversus abdominis muscle.  
What is false about Mallampati grading?  
Done to assess mouth opening  
pillars are seen in grade I  
Only soft palate is seen in grade III  
Oral intubation can be done with difficulty in grad e II  
Ans: D, Oral intubation can be done with difficulty  in grade II  
Ref: Ajay Yadav, Short Textbook of Anesthesia, 6 th  edition, page 53 
QAE FALGUN 8  
 muscle and superficial to the internal oblique musc le  
In the fascial sheath deep to the internal oblique muscle and superficial to the transversus abdominis  
th deep to the internal oblique muscle and superfic ial to the transversus abdominis muscle  
Transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block: TAP block is very effective to produce analgesia for abdomina l 
TAP block is given in the fascial sheath deep to th e internal oblique muscle and superficial to the ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
40    
 Mallampati grading: It is done to assess mouth open ing. Patient is asked to open the mouth as wide as 
possible and protrude the tongue. Depending on the structures seen by examiner the classification is a s 
follows: 
 Class I: Faucial pillars, soft palate a 
 Class II: Base of uvula and soft palate is seen. 
 Class III: Only soft palate is seen. 
 Class IV: Only hard palate is visible (modified Sam pson and Young classification). 
 In Mallampati grade (class) I and II oral intubatio n can be done comf 
while oral intubation is not possible in grade IV. 
 
90.  What is false about EMLA? 
a.  Effective cutaneous anesthesia produced under 30 mi nutes of use 
b.  Topical application  
c.  Used under occlusive dressing  
d.  2.5% lignocaine + 2.5% prilocaine 
 
Ans: A, Effective cutaneous anesthesia produced und er 30 minutes of use 
Ref: Miller Anesthesia, 8 th  edition, page 1044  
 EMLA, which is a eutectic mixture of 2.5% lidocaine  
 It is widely used for ve nipuncture, intravenous cannulation, skin grafting,  and a range of other uses, 
including circumcision.  
 This preparation must be applied under an occlusive  bandage for 45 to 60 minutes to obtain effective 
cutaneous anesthesia. Longer application times incr
 
91.  What is not an ABG finding which is an indication o f mechanical ventilation? 
a.  p (A - a) O2 gradient >350 mm Hg on 100% oxygen 
b.  pCO2 >50 mm Hg 
c.  pH <7.25 
d.  pO2/FiO2 <400 mm Hg 
 
Ans: D, pO2/FiO2 <400 mm Hg 
Ref: Ajay Yadav Anesthesia, 6 th  edition, page 278 
 Putting a patient on ventilator is more or less a c linical criterion however the general guidelines ar e: 
 On the basis of blood- gas analysis: 
 
Mallampati grading: It is done to assess mouth open ing. Patient is asked to open the mouth as wide as 
possible and protrude the tongue. Depending on the structures seen by examiner the classification is a s 
Class I: Faucial pillars, soft palate a nd uvula seen.  
Class II: Base of uvula and soft palate is seen.  
Class III: Only soft palate is seen.  
Class IV: Only hard palate is visible (modified Sam pson and Young classification). 
In Mallampati grade (class) I and II oral intubatio n can be done comf ortably, in grade III with difficulty 
while oral intubation is not possible in grade IV.  
Effective cutaneous anesthesia produced under 30 mi nutes of use  
prilocaine  
Ans: A, Effective cutaneous anesthesia produced und er 30 minutes of use  
 
EMLA, which is a eutectic mixture of 2.5% lidocaine  (aka lignocaine)  base and 2.5% prilocaine base. 
nipuncture, intravenous cannulation, skin grafting,  and a range of other uses, 
This preparation must be applied under an occlusive  bandage for 45 to 60 minutes to obtain effective 
cutaneous anesthesia. Longer application times incr ease the depth and reliability of skin analgesia. 
What is not an ABG finding which is an indication o f mechanical ventilation?  
a) O2 gradient >350 mm Hg on 100% oxygen  
edition, page 278  
Putting a patient on ventilator is more or less a c linical criterion however the general guidelines ar e: 
gas analysis:  
QAE FALGUN 8  
 Mallampati grading: It is done to assess mouth open ing. Patient is asked to open the mouth as wide as 
possible and protrude the tongue. Depending on the structures seen by examiner the classification is a s 
Class IV: Only hard palate is visible (modified Sam pson and Young classification).  
ortably, in grade III with difficulty 
base and 2.5% prilocaine base.  
nipuncture, intravenous cannulation, skin grafting,  and a range of other uses, 
This preparation must be applied under an occlusive  bandage for 45 to 60 minutes to obtain effective 
ease the depth and reliability of skin analgesia.  
Putting a patient on ventilator is more or less a c linical criterion however the general guidelines ar e:  ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
41   
 o pO2 <50 mm Hg on room air or <60 mmHg on FiO2 (insp ired oxygen)> 0.5 (50%). 
o pH <7.25 (acute respiratory failure). 
o pCO2 >50 mm Hg. 
o pOifFiO2 <250 mm Hg (normal >400) 
o p (A - a) 0 2 gradient >350 mm Hg on 100%oxygen. 
 On the basis of pulmonary functions: 
o Respiratory rate >35/ minute. 
o Vital capacity <l5 mL/ kg. 
o Dead space volume (VD/VT) >0.6 (60%). 
o Peak negative pressure < -20 cm H2O. 
o Tidal volume <5 mL/kg. 
 Other. 
o Excessive fatigue of respiratory muscles. 
o Loss of protective airway reflexes which makes pati ent vulnerable for aspiration. 
o Inability to cough adequately. 
 
92.  What is not a cause of prolonged apnea after succin ylcholine? 
a.  Atypical pseudocholinesterase 
b.  Low pseudocholinesterase 
c.  Phase I block 
d.  Phase II block 
 
Ans: C, Phase I block 
Ref: Ajay Yadav Anesthesia, 6 th  edition, page 126 
Prolonged Apnea after Succinylcholine can be becaus e of: 
 Low pseudocholinesterase. 
 Atypical pseudocholinesterase. 
 Phase II block. 
 
93.  What is the pin index system for a cylinder of nitr ous oxide?   
a.  2,5 
b.  3,5 
c.  1,5 
d.  2,6 
 
Ans: B, 3,5 
Ref: Ajay Yadav, 4 th  edition, page 25 
 Pin index system is the safety system preventing mi s-fitting of gas cylinders. Pin index of various ga ses are: 
o Oxygen: 2,5 
o Nitrous oxide: 3,5 
o Cyclopropane: 3,6 
o Air: 1,5 
o Nitrogen: 1,4 
o Entonox: 7 
o Carbon dioxide (<7.5%): 2,6 ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
42   o Carbon dioxide (>7.5%): 1,6 
 
94.  Which of the following is present in the 
machine? 
a.  Ca(OH) 2 
b.  H20 
c.  KOH 
d.  NaOH 
 
Ans: A, Ca(OH) 2 
Ref: Miller’s Anesthesia, 8 th  edition, page 662 
Sodalime contains 80% Ca(OH) 2, 2.6% KOH, 1.3% NaOH and 15% H 
 
Psychiatry 
95.  What antidepressant a mong the following is associated with maximum impot ence? 
a.  Amitriptyline  
b.  Bupropion 
c.  Fluoxetine  
d.  Mirtazapine 
 
Ans: A, Amitriptyline  
Ref: Ahuja Psychiatry, 7 th  edition, page 186 
 
Carbon dioxide (>7.5%): 1,6  
Which of the following is present in the highest amount in the CO2 absorber sodalime used in  anesthesia 
edition, page 662  
, 2.6% KOH, 1.3% NaOH and 15% H 20.  
mong the following is associated with maximum impot ence?  
 
QAE FALGUN 8  
 highest amount in the CO2 absorber sodalime used in  anesthesia ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
43   
 96.  What is a deeply ingrained pattern of behavior that  includes modes of perception, relatingto and think ing about 
oneself and the surrounding environment known as? 
a.  Affect  
b.  Attitude  
c.  Mood  
d.  Personality  
 
Ans: D, Personality  
Ref: Ahuja Psychiatry, 7 th  edition, page 113 
Personality is defined as a deeply ingrained patter n of behaviour that includes modes of perception, r elating to and 
thinking about oneself and the surrounding environm ent. Personality traits are normal, prominent aspec ts of personality. 
Personality disorders result when these personality  traits become abnormal, i.e. become inflexible and  maladaptive, and 
cause significant social or occupational impairment , or significant subjective distress. 
 
97.  What pervasive developmental disorder is also known  as high functioning autism? 
a.  Asperger’s syndrome  
b.  Heller’s syndrome 
c.  Rett’s syndrome  
d.  Strauss syndrome 
 
Ans: A, Asperger’s syndrome  
Ref: Ahuja Psychiatry, 7 th  edition, page 165 
Asperger’s syndrome is characterised by autism with out any significant delay in language or cognitive development 
(including intelligence). This syndrome occurs pred ominantly in boys (male : female ratio = 8:1). It p robably represents 
mild cases of autism and has been also called as hi gh functioning autism. 
 
98.  What is a person trying to kill herself but never i ntending to die by the act known as? 
a.  Attempted suicide  
b.  Presumed suicide  
c.  Suicide  
d.  Suicidal gesture  
 
Ans: D, Suicidal gesture  
Ref: Ahuja Psychiatry, 7 th edition, page 222 
 Suicide is the model of psychiatric emergencies and  is also the commonest cause of death among the 
psychiatric patients.  
 Suicide is a type of deliberate self-harm (DSH) and  is defined as a human act of self-intentioned and self-
inflicted cessation (death). It ends with a fatal o utcome. DSH is an act of intentionally injuring one self, 
irrespective of the actual outcome. 
 An attempted suicide is an unsuccessful suicidal ac t with a nonfatal outcome. It is believed that 2-10 % of 
all persons who attempt suicide, eventually complet e suicide in the next 10 years. 
 A suicidal gesture, on the other hand, is an attemp ted suicide where the person performing the action 
never intends to die by the act. However, some of t hese persons may accidentally die during the act. 
Attempted suicide is more com mon in women while co mpleted suicide is 2-4 times commoner in men. 
 ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
44   
 99.  What is thoughts being imposed by some external for ce on person’s passive mind known as? 
a.  Thought broadcasting 
b.  Thought diffusion  
c.  Thought insertion 
d.  Thought removal  
 
Ans: C, Thought insertion 
Ref: Ahuja Psychiatry, 7 th  edition, page 55 
First Rank Symptoms (SFRS) of Schizophrenia: 
 Audible thoughts: Voices speaking out thoughts alou d or ‘thought echo’. 
 Voices heard arguing: Two or more hallucinatory voi ces discussing the subject in third person. 
 Voices commenting on one’s action. 
 Thought withdrawal: Thoughts cease and subject expe riences them as removed by an external force. 
 Thought insertion: Experience of thoughts imposed b y some external force on person’s passive mind. 
 Thought diffusion or broadcasting: Experience of th oughts escaping the confines of self and as being 
experienced by others around. 
 ‘Made’ feelings or affect. 
 ‘Made’ impulses. 
 ‘Made’ volition or acts: In ‘made’ affect, impulses  and volitions, the person experiences feelings, im pulses 
or acts which are imposed by some external force. I n ‘made’ volition, for example, one’s own acts are 
experienced as being under the control of some exte rnal force. 
 Somatic passivity: Bodily sensations, especially se nsory symptoms, are experienced as imposed on body by 
some external force. 
 Delusional perception: Normal perception has a priv ate and illogical meaning. 
 
100.   What is the treatment of choice in a psychologicall y-minded patient with narcissistic personality diso rder? 
a.  Antipsychotics  
b.  Cognitive behavior therapy  
c.  Dialectical behaviour therapy 
d.  Psychodynamic psychotherapy 
 
Ans: D, Psychodynamic psychotherapy 
Ref: Ahuja Psychiatry, 7 th  edition, page 116 
 Narcissistic Personality Disorder is a relatively n ew concept in classification, this disorder is 
characterized by: 
o 1. Ideas of grandiosity and inflated sense of self importance. 
o 2. Preoccupation with fantasies of unlimited succes s. 
o 3. Attention seeking, dramatic behaviour, needs con stant praise, and unable to face criticism. 
o 4. Lack of empathy with others, with exploitative b ehaviour. 
o 5. Shaky self-esteem, underlying sense of inferiori ty, easily depressed by minor events. 
 Treatment: Psychodynamic/psychoanalytical psychothe rapy is the treatment of choice in a 
psychologically-minded patient. 
 
101.   Which of the following cannabis preparation has the  highest tetrahydrocannabinol content? 
a.  Bhang ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
45   b.  Charas 
c.  Ganja  
d.  Hash oil 
 
Ans: D, Hash oil 
Ref: Ahuja Psychiatry, 7 th  edition, page 45 
 
Dermatology 
102.   What is the optimum time to remove sutures placed a fter cutaneous excision on lower leg? 
a.  2 – 3 days 
b.  4 – 5 days 
c.  8 – 10 days 
d.  10 – 14 days 
 
Ans: D, 10 – 14 days  
Ref: Rook’s Dermatology, 9 th  edition, page 20.16 
 The timing of suture removal depends upon the site and the amount of tension across the wound. With 
appropriate surgical technique and use of buried ve rtical mattress sutures all cutan 
removed at 7 days.  
 Where there is a history of skin reactivity, suture s on the face may be removed after 4 
wound is expected to heal slowly (e.g. on the lower  leg) or lacks the support of buried sutures then i t is 
sens ible to leave the surface sutures in place for 10 
 
103.   Which of the following is associated with typical a pple jelly color on diascopy? 
a.  Lepromatous leprosy  
b.  Lupus vulgaris  
c.  Scrofuloderma  
d.  Tuberculoid leprosy  
 
Ans: B, Lupus vulgaris 
Ref: Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology, 9 th  edition, page 2864 
 Lesions of lupus vulgaris (LV) are usually solitary , but two or more sites may be involved simultaneou sly. In 
patients with active pulmonary tuberculosis, multip le foci may develop. In approximately 90% of patien ts, 
th e head and neck are involved. LV usually starts on the nose, cheek, earlobe, or scalp and slowly exten ds 
What is the optimum time to remove sutures placed a fter cutaneous excision on lower leg? 
edition, page 20.16  
The timing of suture removal depends upon the site and the amount of tension across the wound. With 
appropriate surgical technique and use of buried ve rtical mattress sutures all cutan 
Where there is a history of skin reactivity, suture s on the face may be removed after 4 
wound is expected to heal slowly (e.g. on the lower  leg) or lacks the support of buried sutures then i t is 
ible to leave the surface sutures in place for 10 –14 days. 
Which of the following is associated with typical a pple jelly color on diascopy?  
edition, page 2864  
Lesions of lupus vulgaris (LV) are usually solitary , but two or more sites may be involved simultaneou sly. In 
patients with active pulmonary tuberculosis, multip le foci may develop. In approximately 90% of patien ts, 
e head and neck are involved. LV usually starts on the nose, cheek, earlobe, or scalp and slowly exten ds 
QAE FALGUN 8  
  
What is the optimum time to remove sutures placed a fter cutaneous excision on lower leg?  
The timing of suture removal depends upon the site and the amount of tension across the wound. With 
appropriate surgical technique and use of buried ve rtical mattress sutures all cutan eous sutures may be 
Where there is a history of skin reactivity, suture s on the face may be removed after 4 –5 days. When the 
wound is expected to heal slowly (e.g. on the lower  leg) or lacks the support of buried sutures then i t is 
Lesions of lupus vulgaris (LV) are usually solitary , but two or more sites may be involved simultaneou sly. In 
patients with active pulmonary tuberculosis, multip le foci may develop. In approximately 90% of patien ts, 
e head and neck are involved. LV usually starts on the nose, cheek, earlobe, or scalp and slowly exten ds 
ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
46   onto adjacent regions. Other areas are rarely invol ved. The initial lesion is a brownish 
macule or papule with a smooth or hyperke 
 On diascopy, the infiltrate exhibits a typical appl e jelly color. Progression is characterized by elev ation, a 
deeper brownish color, and formation of a plaque. I nvolution in one area with expansion in another oft en 
results in a gyrate out line border. Ulceration may occur. Hypertrophic for ms appear as a soft nodule or 
plaque with a hyperkeratotic surface. 
 
104.   What is not associated with faster rate of nail gro wth? 
a.  Arteriovenous shunts  
b.  Fever  
c.  Hyperthyroidism  
d.  Psoriasis  
 
Ans: B, Fever  
Ref: Rook Dermatology, 9 th  edition, page 95.5 
 
105.   Contact allergy of the delayed hypersensitivity typ e is investigated using which of the following? 
a.  Patch test 
b.  Prick test 
c.  Scratch test 
d.  Serum IgE  
 
Ans: A, Patch test 
Ref: Rook’s Dermatology, 9 th  edition, page 4.2 
 Patch tests are usually used to detect contact alle rgy of the delayed hypersensitivity type. They are 
usually read at 48–72 h and again up to 1 week, but can also be read at 1 5 
urticaria. At times, patch testing may usefu 
 Prick testing is used routine allergy testing. 
 The scratch test resembles the prick test. A linear  scratch about 1 
blood, is made through the epidermis. This test giv es less reproduc 
  
106.   White dermographism is pronounced in which of the f ollowing conditions? 
a.  Atopic dermatitis  
onto adjacent regions. Other areas are rarely invol ved. The initial lesion is a brownish 
macule or papule with a smooth or hyperke ratotic surface. 
On diascopy, the infiltrate exhibits a typical appl e jelly color. Progression is characterized by elev ation, a 
deeper brownish color, and formation of a plaque. I nvolution in one area with expansion in another oft en 
line border. Ulceration may occur. Hypertrophic for ms appear as a soft nodule or 
plaque with a hyperkeratotic surface.  
What is not associated with faster rate of nail gro wth?  
edition, page 95.5  
 
Contact allergy of the delayed hypersensitivity typ e is investigated using which of the following? 
edition, page 4.2 3 – 4.24  
Patch tests are usually used to detect contact alle rgy of the delayed hypersensitivity type. They are 
h and again up to 1 week, but can also be read at 1 5 
urticaria. At times, patch testing may usefu lly be combined with scratch testing. 
Prick testing is used routine allergy testing.  
The scratch test resembles the prick test. A linear  scratch about 1  cm long, but not sufficient to draw 
blood, is made through the epidermis. This test giv es less reproduc ible results than the prick test. 
White dermographism is pronounced in which of the f ollowing conditions?  
QAE FALGUN 8  
 onto adjacent regions. Other areas are rarely invol ved. The initial lesion is a brownish -red, soft or friable 
On diascopy, the infiltrate exhibits a typical appl e jelly color. Progression is characterized by elev ation, a 
deeper brownish color, and formation of a plaque. I nvolution in one area with expansion in another oft en 
line border. Ulceration may occur. Hypertrophic for ms appear as a soft nodule or 
Contact allergy of the delayed hypersensitivity typ e is investigated using which of the following?  
Patch tests are usually used to detect contact alle rgy of the delayed hypersensitivity type. They are 
h and again up to 1 week, but can also be read at 1 5 –30 min to detect contact 
lly be combined with scratch testing.  
cm long, but not sufficient to draw 
ible results than the prick test.  ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
47   b.  Drug induced wheals 
c.  Cholinergic urticaria 
d.  Urticarial vasculitis  
 
Ans: A, Atopic dermatitis  
Ref: Rook’s Dermatology, 9 th  edition, page 42.10 
White dermographism (due to capillary vasoconstrict ion following light stroking of the skin) occurs no rmally but is 
particularly pronounced in atopic eczema.  
 
107.   Which among the following is a type of cicatricial alopecia? 
a.  Alopecia areata 
b.  Female pattern hair loss  
c.  Pseudopelade of Brocq 
d.  Syphilis  
 
Ans: C, Pseudopelade of Brocq 
Ref: Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology, 9 th  edition, page 1525 
 
edition, page 42.10  
White dermographism (due to capillary vasoconstrict ion following light stroking of the skin) occurs no rmally but is 
Which among the following is a type of cicatricial alopecia?  
edition, page 1525  
 
QAE FALGUN 8  
 White dermographism (due to capillary vasoconstrict ion following light stroking of the skin) occurs no rmally but is ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
48    
108.   What disease gives row of tombstones appearance in histopathology? 
a.  Bullous pemphigoid  
b.  Epidermolysis bullosa simplex 
c.  Pemphigus foliaceous  
d.  Pemphigus vulgaris  
 
Ans: D, Pemphigus vulgaris 
Ref: Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology, 9 th  edition, page 921 
 
 The characteristic histopathologic finding in PV is  a suprabasal blister with acantholysis. Just above  the 
basal cell layer, epidermal cells lose their normal  cell 
rounded up (acantholytic) keratinocytes ar 
 The basal cells stay attached to the basement membr ane, but may lose the contact with their 
neighbors; as a result, they may appear to be a “ro w of tombstones,” symbolic of the potentially fatal  
prognosis of this disease. Usually, 
remains intact, as these cells maintain their cell adhesion. 
 
Radiology 
109. Which of the following is the commonest locati on of osteosarcoma? 
a.  Epiphysis 
b.  Metaphysis 
c.  Diaphysis 
d.  Epi-metaphysis 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Primer of Diagnostic Imaging, 5th edition, Pag e No: 311 
Location of bone lesions according to anatomy: 
• Epiphysis: typical are cartilaginous and articular lesions such as chondroblastoma or eosinophilic gra nuloma (EG) 
• Metaphysis: lesions of d ifferent causes (neoplastic eg. Osteosarcoma, infla mmatory, metabolic) have apredilection 
for the metaphysis (rich blood supply); therefore, this location alone is of limited differential diag nostic value. 
• Epiphyseal/metaphyseal region: giant cell tumors 
What disease gives row of tombstones appearance in histopathology?  
Epidermolysis bullosa simplex  
edition, page 921  
 
The characteristic histopathologic finding in PV is  a suprabasal blister with acantholysis. Just above  the 
basal cell layer, epidermal cells lose their normal  cell -to-cell contacts and form a blister. Often, a few 
rounded up (acantholytic) keratinocytes ar e in the blister cavity.  
The basal cells stay attached to the basement membr ane, but may lose the contact with their 
neighbors; as a result, they may appear to be a “ro w of tombstones,” symbolic of the potentially fatal  
prognosis of this disease. Usually,  the upper epidermis (from 1 or 2 cell layers above the basal cells) 
remains intact, as these cells maintain their cell adhesion.  
109. Which of the following is the commonest locati on of osteosarcoma?  
Ref: Primer of Diagnostic Imaging, 5th edition, Pag e No: 311  
Location of bone lesions according to anatomy:  
Epiphysis: typical are cartilaginous and articular lesions such as chondroblastoma or eosinophilic gra nuloma (EG) 
ifferent causes (neoplastic eg. Osteosarcoma, infla mmatory, metabolic) have apredilection 
for the metaphysis (rich blood supply); therefore, this location alone is of limited differential diag nostic value. 
Epiphyseal/metaphyseal region: giant cell tumors  
QAE FALGUN 8  
 The characteristic histopathologic finding in PV is  a suprabasal blister with acantholysis. Just above  the 
cell contacts and form a blister. Often, a few 
The basal cells stay attached to the basement membr ane, but may lose the contact with their 
neighbors; as a result, they may appear to be a “ro w of tombstones,” symbolic of the potentially fatal  
the upper epidermis (from 1 or 2 cell layers above the basal cells) 
Epiphysis: typical are cartilaginous and articular lesions such as chondroblastoma or eosinophilic gra nuloma (EG)  
ifferent causes (neoplastic eg. Osteosarcoma, infla mmatory, metabolic) have apredilection 
for the metaphysis (rich blood supply); therefore, this location alone is of limited differential diag nostic value.  ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
49   
 • Diaphysis: Ewing’s sarcoma 
 
110. Which of the following bone tumor mimics osteo myelitis both  clinically and radiologically?  
a.  Osteosarcoma 
b.  Giant Cell Tumor 
c.  Enchondroma 
d.  Ewing’s Sarcoma 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Primer of Diagnostic Imaging, 5th edition, Pag e No: 319 
Ewing tumor 
• Relatively common malignant tumor derived from undi fferentiated mesenchymal cells of the bone marrowor  
primitive neuroectodermal cells (small, roundcell t umor). 
• Age: 5 to 15 years. Clinical finding is a mass; 35% of patients have fever, leukocytosis, elevated ESR, and thus the 
tumor clinically mimics infection. 5-yearsurvival: 40%. Very rare in black population. 
Location 
• Diaphysis of lower extremity, 70% 
• Flat bones (sacrum, innominate bone, scapula), 25% 
• Vertebral body, 5% 
Radiographic Features 
• Aggressive tumor: permeative or moth-eaten osteolyt ic characteristics, cortical erosion, periostitis 
• No tumor matrix 
• Sclerotic reactive bone may be present. 
• Extraosseous soft tissue mass is typical. 
 
111. The best way to determine the rotation in the chest X-ray is to look for the : 
a.  Position of the medial ends of each clavicle relati ve to the spinous process  
b.  Compare the lucency of the both lung-fields. 
c.  Appearance of the ribs 
d.  Appearance of the scapula. 
 
Ans: a 
Learning Radiology, Recognizing the basics, 3 rd  Edition 
• Significant rotation (the patient turns the body to  one side or the other) may alter the expected cont ours of the 
heart and great vessels, the hila, and hemidiaphrag ms. 
• The easiest way to assess whether the patient is ro tated toward the left or right is by studying the p osition of the 
medial ends of each clavicle relative to the spinou s process of the thoracic vertebral body between th e clavicles. If 
the spinous process appears to lie equidistant from  the medial end of each clavicle on the frontal che st 
radiograph, there is no rotation  
• If the spinous process appears closer to the medial  end of the left clavicle, the patient is rotated t oward his or her 
own right side.  
• If the spinous process appears closer to the medial  end of the right clavicle, the patient is rotated toward her or 
his own left side.  
 
112. Which of the following is a sign of pneumoperi toneum? ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
50   
 a.  Football sign 
b.  Copula sign 
c.  Ligamentum teres sign 
d.  All of the above 
 
Ans d 
Ref: Learning Radiology, Recognizing the basic patt ern. 3 rd  edition, page 411 
Signs seen in pneumoperitoneum: 
• Football sign = large pneumoperitoneum outlining en tire abdominal cavity 
• Double wall sign = Rigler sign = air on both sides of bowel caused by intraluminal gas and free air ou tside (usually 
requires >1 L of free intraperitoneal gas and intra peritoneal fluid) 
• Inverted V sign = outline of both lateral umbilical  ligaments(containing inferior epigastric vessels) 
• Urachus sign = outline of middle umbilical ligament  
• Single large area of hyperlucency over the liver 
• Oblique linear area of hyperlucency outlining the p osteroinferior 
• Outline of falciform ligament = long vertical line to the right of midline extending from ligamentum t eres notch to 
umbilicus; most common structure outlined 
• Ligamentum teres notch = inverted V-shaped area of hyperlucency along undersurface of liver 
• Ligamentum teres sign = air outlining fissure of li gamentum teres hepatis along posterior free edge of  falciform 
ligament seen as vertically oriented, sharply defin ed slit like/oval area of hyperlucency between 10th  and 12th ribs 
within 2.5 to4.0 cm of right vertebral border, 2 to  7 mm wide and 6 to20 mm long 
• Saddlebag/mustache/cupola sign = gas trapped below central tendon of diaphragm. 
 
113. What is the shape of subdural hematoma in cros s sectional imaging?  
a.  Hour glass shaped 
b.  Biconvex 
c.  Crescentic shaped 
d.  Lens shaped 
 
Ans: c 
Epidural haematoma: Typically lentiform (lens-shape d, biconvex, lemon-shaped) and do not cross sutures  as the 
periosteum crosses through the suture continuous wi th the outer periosteal layer. 
 
Subdural haematoma: Typically crescentic (crescent moon-shaped, concave, banana-shaped) and more exten sive than 
EDH, with the internal margin paralleling the corti cal margin of the adjacent brain. As these occur in  the subdural space, 
they cross sutures. 
 
114. Which of the following dose not make the right  cardiac border in the Chest X – ray? 
a.  Right atrium 
b.  Right Ventricle 
c.  SVC 
d.  IVC 
 
Ans: b 
Learning Radiology, Recognizing the basics . 3 rd  edition, page 25 ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
51   
 Normal right cardiac border seen in the frontal pro jection 
• Superior venacava 
• Ascending aorta ( when tortuous) 
• Right atrium  
• inferior venacava 
Normal right cardiac border seen in the frontal pro jection 
• Aortic Knuckle 
• Pulmonary Bay 
• Left Atrial appendage 
• Left ventricle 
 
115. Interposition of the bowel, usually colon, bet ween the inferior surface of the right hemidiaphrag m and the 
superior surface of the liver may be misinterpreted  as a pneumoperitoneum. What is this called? 
a.  Cupula sign  
b.  Chilaiditi sign 
c.  Sentinel loop 
d.  Halo sign 
 
Ans: b 
Chilaiditi sign refers to the interposition of the bowel, usually colon, between the inferior surface of the right 
hemidiaphragm and the superior surface of the liver . It may be misinterpreted as a true pneumoperitone um resulting in 
unnecessary further investigations and/or therapy ( so-called pseudo pneumoperitoneum). 
Radiographic features 
Features that suggest Chilaiditi sign include: 
• gas between liver and diaphragm 
• haustra within the gas suggesting that it is within  the bowel and not free 
 
CT 
If there is a clinical suspicion of abdominal visce ral perforation and plain radiographic appearances are unclear, abdominal 
CT can be performed to clarify whether there is pne umoperitoneum. 
CT can clearly demonstrate the presence of interpos ed colonic loops between the right hemidiaphragm an d liver with no 
free intraperitoneal air. 
 
 
Anatomy 
116. The radial artery lies just lateral to the ten don of which muscle? 
a.  Pronator teres 
b.  Flexor carpi radialis 
c.  Palmaris longus 
d.  Flexor carpi ulnaris 
 
Ans: b 
The radial artery lies lateral to the tendon of the  flexor carpi radialis. 
 
117. Bull Rider’s Thumb is sprain of: ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
52   
 a.  Ulnar collateral ligament 
b.  Radial collateral ligament 
c.  Transverse collateral ligament 
d.  Thenar eminence 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Moore's Anatomy 7th Edition, Page No: 817 
Bull Rider’s Thumb 
Bull rider’s thumb refers to a sprain of the radial  collateral ligament, and an avulsion fracture of t he lateral part of the 
proximal phalanx of the thumb. This injury is commo n in individuals who ride mechanical bulls. 
 
118. Parasympathetic fibers stimulate secretion by all glands except which of the following? 
a.  Sweat glands 
b.  Lacrimal glands 
c.  Salivary glands 
d.  Nasal glands 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Moore's Anatomy 7th Edition, Page No: 65 
 In general, the effects of sympathetic stimulation are catabolic, preparing body for the fight-or-flig ht response. 
 In general, the effects of parasympathetic stimulat ion are anabolic, promoting normal function and con serving 
energy. 
 The parasympathetic system is restricted in its dis tribution to the head, neck, and body cavities (exc ept for erectile 
tissues of genitalia); otherwise, parasympathetic f ibers are never found in the body wall and limbs. S ympathetic 
fibers, by comparison, are distributed to all vascu larized portions of the body. 
 With the exception of the sweat glands, glandular s ecretion is parasympathetically stimulated. 
 With the exception of the coronary arteries, vasoco nstriction is sympathetically stimulated; the effec ts of 
sympathetic stimulation on glands (other than sweat  glands) are the indirect effects of vasoconstricti on. 
 
119. The pleuropericardial membranes develop into w hat structures of the adult? 
a.  Fibrous pericardium 
b.  Diaphragm 
c.  Parietal pleura 
d.  Visceral pleura 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Moore's Anatomy 7th Edition, Page No: 131 
The pleuropericardial membranes develop into the fi brous pericardium. 
Development of fibrous pericardium and relocation o f phrenic nerve: Exuberant growth of the lungs into  the primordial 
pleura cavities (pleuroperitoneal canals) cleaves t he pleuropericardial folds from the body wall, crea ting the 
pleuropericardial membranes. The membranes include the phrenic nerve and become the fibrous pericardiu m that 
encloses the heart and separates the pleural and pe ricardial cavities. 
 
120. All of the following statements concerning the  spleen are correct except: 
a.  Largest of the lymphatic organs ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
53   
 b.  Associated posteriorly with the left 9 th  through 11th ribs 
c.  Located retroperitoneally 
d.  Normally, does not descend inferior to the costal r egion 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: Moore's Anatomy 7th Edition, Page No: 289 
 The spleen is the largest of the lymphatic organs a nd is a mobile structure entirely surrounded by per itoneum 
except at the hilum. 
 It lies beneath the 9th, 10th, and 11th ribs and do es not normally descend inferior to the costal marg in. The spleen 
varies considerably in size, weight, and shape. 
 
121. A 3-year-old child is admitted to the emergenc y department with severe headache, high fever, mala ise, and 
confusion. Radiographic and physical examinations r eveal that the patient suffers from meningitis. A l umbar puncture is 
ordered. Which vertebral level is the most appropri ate location for the lumbar puncture? 
a.  T12-L1 
b.  L1-2 
c.  L2-3 
d.  L4-5 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Gray’s Anatomy for Students, 108 
 A lumbar puncture is performed by taking a sample o f CSF from the lumbar cistern (the subarachnoid spa ce below 
the spinal cord) between vertebrae L4 and L5 or som etimes between L3 and L4.  
 It is done in this region because the spinal cord e nds at the level of L1 to L2 and the dural sac ends  at the level of 
S2. 
 Therefore it is the safest place to do the procedur e because it lies between these areas and the risk of injuring the 
spinal cord is avoided. 
 
122. A 34-year-old woman is admitted to the emergen cy department after a car crash. Radiographic exami nation 
reveals a whiplash injury in addition to hyperexten sion of her cervical spine. Which of the following ligaments will most 
likely be injured? 
a.  Ligamentum flavum 
b.  Anterior longitudinal ligament 
c.  Posterior longitudinal ligament 
d.  Anulus fibrosus 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Gray’s Anatomy for Students, 82-86 
 The anterior longitudinal ligament is a strong fibr ous band that covers and connects the anterolateral  aspect of 
the vertebrae and intervertebral disks; it maintain s stability and prevents hyperextension. It can be torn by 
cervical hyperextension.  
 The ligamentum flavum helps maintain upright postur e by connecting the laminae of two adjacent vertebr ae.  
 The posterior longitudinal ligament runs within the  vertebral canal supporting the posterior aspect of  the 
vertebrae and prevents hyperflexion.  ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
54   
  The anulus fibrosus is the outer fibrous part of an  intervertebral disk. The interspinous ligament con nects adjacent 
spinous processes. 
 
123. On digital examination of the vagina, the port ion of the uterus that one anticipates palpating wi th the examining 
finger is the cervix and its external os. Which of the following is the most common position of the ut erus? 
a.  Anteflexed and retroverted 
b.  Retroflexed and anteverted 
c.  Anteflexed and anteverted 
d.  Retroflexed and retroverted 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: Gray’s Anatomy for Students, 455-458 
Normally the uterus is anteflexed at the junction o f the cervix and the body and anteverted at the jun ction of the vagina 
and the cervical canal. 
 
124. Which is not a lateral ligament of ankle? 
a.  Anterior talofibular ligament  
b.  Calcaneofibular ligament  
c.  Deltoid ligament  
d.  Posterior talofibular ligament  
 
Ans: c 
Ref: Gray’s Anatomy for Students, 4th edition, page  635 
 The lateral ligament of the ankle is composed of th ree separate ligaments, the anterior talofibular li gament, the 
posterior talofibular ligament, and the calcaneofib ular ligament. 
 The medial (deltoid) ligament is large, strong, and  triangular in shape. Its apex is attached above to  the medial 
malleolus and its broad base is attached below to a  line that extends from the tuberosity of the navic ular bone in 
front to the medial tubercle of the talus behind. 
 
125. Which of the following segments of liver is su pplied by right hepatic artery? 
a.  I 
b.  II 
c.  III 
d.  IV 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Gray’s Anatomy, 41st edition, page 1166  ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
55    
 
126. What is the shape of right adrenal gland? 
a.  Elliptical  
b.  Pyramidal  
c.  Semilunar  
d.  Spherical  
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Gray’s Anatomy, 41st edition, page 1194 
 The mean maximum width of the body of the suprarena l gland is 
width of each limb of the gland (medial and lateral ) is approximately 30 mm. No individual suprarenal limb should 
measure more than 5 mm in transverse section. In ad ults, each suprarenal gland weighs approximat 
medulla contributes about one- tenth of the total weight) and has a volume of appr oximately 3 
 The glands are macroscopically slightly different i n external appearance. The right is pyramidal in sh ape and has 
two well developed lower proj ections (limbs), giving a cross 
The left gland is more semilunar in shape, flattene d in the anteroposterior plane and marginally large r than the 
right. The bulk of the right suprarenal sits on the  apex 
left gland, which lies on the anteromedial aspect o f the upper pole of the left kidney. 
  
127. What is the location of valves within the port al vein? 
a.  At porta hepatis  
b.  In the extrahepatic portion only 
c.  In the intrahepatic portion only  
d.  Valveless  
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Gray’s Anatomy, 41st edition, page 1167 
 The portal vein is formed behind the neck of the pa ncreas, usually from the convergence of the superio r 
mesenteric and splenic veins. Its origin 
first lumbar vertebra and the upper border of the b ody of the second lumbar. 
 The portal vein is approximately 8 cm long and asce nds obliquely to the right behind the first part of  t 
duodenum, the common bile duct and gastroduodenal a rtery, and anterior to the inferior vena cava. It e nters the 
 
126. What is the shape of right adrenal gland?  
Ref: Gray’s Anatomy, 41st edition, page 1194  
The mean maximum width of the body of the suprarena l gland is  61 mm (right) and 79 mm (left), and the mean 
width of each limb of the gland (medial and lateral ) is approximately 30 mm. No individual suprarenal limb should 
measure more than 5 mm in transverse section. In ad ults, each suprarenal gland weighs approximat 
tenth of the total weight) and has a volume of appr oximately 3 
The glands are macroscopically slightly different i n external appearance. The right is pyramidal in sh ape and has 
ections (limbs), giving a cross -sectional appearance similar to a three 
The left gland is more semilunar in shape, flattene d in the anteroposterior plane and marginally large r than the 
right. The bulk of the right suprarenal sits on the  apex of the right kidney and usually lies slightly highe r than the 
left gland, which lies on the anteromedial aspect o f the upper pole of the left kidney.  
127. What is the location of valves within the port al vein?  
Ref: Gray’s Anatomy, 41st edition, page 1167  
The portal vein is formed behind the neck of the pa ncreas, usually from the convergence of the superio r 
mesenteric and splenic veins. Its origin lies in the transpyloric plane between the lower bo rder of the body of the 
first lumbar vertebra and the upper border of the b ody of the second lumbar.  
The portal vein is approximately 8 cm long and asce nds obliquely to the right behind the first part of  t 
duodenum, the common bile duct and gastroduodenal a rtery, and anterior to the inferior vena cava. It e nters the 
QAE FALGUN 8  
 61 mm (right) and 79 mm (left), and the mean 
width of each limb of the gland (medial and lateral ) is approximately 30 mm. No individual suprarenal limb should 
measure more than 5 mm in transverse section. In ad ults, each suprarenal gland weighs approximat ely 5 g (the 
tenth of the total weight) and has a volume of appr oximately 3 –6 cm3. 
The glands are macroscopically slightly different i n external appearance. The right is pyramidal in sh ape and has 
sectional appearance similar to a three -pointed star. 
The left gland is more semilunar in shape, flattene d in the anteroposterior plane and marginally large r than the 
of the right kidney and usually lies slightly highe r than the 
The portal vein is formed behind the neck of the pa ncreas, usually from the convergence of the superio r 
lies in the transpyloric plane between the lower bo rder of the body of the 
The portal vein is approximately 8 cm long and asce nds obliquely to the right behind the first part of  t he 
duodenum, the common bile duct and gastroduodenal a rtery, and anterior to the inferior vena cava. It e nters the ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
56   
 right border of the lesser omentum and ascends ante rior to the epiploic foramen to reach the right end  of the 
porta hepatis, where it divides into right and left  main branches, which enter the liver.  
 In the lesser omentum, the portal vein lies posteri or to both the bile duct and the hepatic artery. It  is surrounded 
by the hepatic nerve plexus and accompanied by nume rous lymphatics and some lymph nodes. 
 It is typically valveless. 
 
Physiology 
128. The number of muscle fibers innervated by a mo tor axon is smallest in:  
a.  Gastrocnemius  
b.  Orbicularis oculi  
c.  Single-unit smooth muscle  
d.  Soleus 
 
Ans: b 
Where fine control of force is required, each motor  unit innervates few muscle fibers (upto 10 muscle fibers). In contrast 
in large muscles, each motor axon may innervate ove r 100 muscle fibers. 
If a muscle is required for fine control or for del icate movements (e.g., movement of the fingers or h ands), its motor units 
will tend to have small innervation ratios. That is , each motor neuron will innervate a small number o f muscle fibers (10-
100), enabling many nuances of movement of the enti re muscle. If a muscle is required only for coarse movements (e.g., a 
thigh muscle), its motor units will tend to have a high innervation ratio (i.e., each motor neuron inn ervating 1000 or more 
muscle fibers), as there is no necessity for indivi dual muscle fibers to undergo highly coordinated, d ifferential contractions 
to produce a fine movement. 
 
129. Muller's doctrine of specific nerve energies i s otherwise known as:  
a.  Bell-Magendie law  
b.  Labeled-line principle  
c.  Weber-Fechner law  
d.  law of projection 
 
Ans: b  
The same sensation is perceived no matter how a sen sory pathway is excited. Each pathway is labeled to  transmit a 
specific sensory modality. This is the labeled line  principle or Muller's doctrine of specific nerve e nergies. 
 
130. Potassium is maximum in: 
a.  Cell  
b.  Plasma 
c.  Interstitium  
d.  Bone 
 
Ans: a 
Maximum potassium is in Cell (ICF = 98%), primarily  in the muscle, skin, subcutaneous tissue, and red blood cells. 
Maximum sodium stored in bone. 
 
131. The electrogenic Na, K ATPase plays a critical  role in cellular physiology by 
a.  Using the energy in ATP to extrude 3 Na+ out of the  cell in exchange for taking two K+ into the cell ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
57   
 b.  Using the energy in ATP to extrude 3 K+ out of the cell in exchange for taking two Na+ into the cell 
c.  Using the energy in moving Na+ into the cell or K+ outside the cell to make ATP 
d.  Using the energy in moving Na+ outside of the cell or K+ inside the cell to make ATP 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Ganong physiology 25th Edition, Page No: 10, 4 9 
 Because the Na, K ATPase moves three Na+ out of the  cell for every two K+ moved in, it also contribute s to the 
membrane potential, and thus is termed an electrogenic pump. 
 It is an electrogenic pump in that it moves three positive charges out of the cell for each two that it moves in, and 
it is therefore said to have a coupling ratio of 3:2.  
 It is found in all parts of the body. Its activity is inhibited by ouabain and related digitalis glyco sides used in the 
treatment of heart failure.  
 It is a heterodimer made up of an α subunit with a molecular weight of approximately 100,000 and a β s ubunit 
with a molecular weight of approximately 55,000. 
 
132. Pseudounipolar cells: 
a.  Sympathetic ganglia 
b.  Parasympathetic 
c.  Cranial nerve ganglion 
d.  Dorsal root ganglion 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Ganong physiology 25th Edition, Page No: 87 
Some sensory neurons are in a subclass of bipolar c ells called pseudounipolar cells. As the cell devel ops, a single process 
splits into two, both of which function as axons-on e going to skin or muscle and another to the spinal  cord. 
 
133. Sarcomere ends between: 
a.  A band and I band 
b.  Two Z lines 
c.  Two I bands 
d.  Two A lines 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Ganong physiology 25th Edition, Page No: 100, 101 
Differences in the refractive indexes of the variou s parts of the muscle fiber are responsible for the  characteristic cross-
striations seen in skeletal muscle when viewed unde r the microscope. The parts of the cross-striations  are frequently 
identified by letters.  
The light I band is divided by the dark Z line, and the dark A band has the lighter H band in its cente r.  
A transverse M line is seen in the middle of the H band, and this line plus the narrow light areas on either side of it are 
sometimes called the pseudo-H zone. The area betwee n two adjacent Z lines is called a sarcomere. 
 
134. Cardiac index is defined as: 
a.  Stroke volume/m2 BSA 
b.  CO per unit body surface area 
c.  Systolic pressure/m2 BSA ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
58   
 d.  End diastolic volume 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Ganong physiology 25th Edition, Page No: 544 
 
The amount of blood pumped out of the heart per bea t, the stroke volume, is about 70 mL from each ventricle in a resting 
man of average size in the supine position. The out put of the heart per unit of time is the cardiac output. In a resting, 
supine man, it averages about 5.0 L/min (70 mL × 72  beats/min). There is a correlation between resting  cardiac output and 
body surface area. The output per minute per square  meter of body surface (the cardiac index ) averages 3.2 L. 
 
135. A shift of posture from supine to upright post ure is associated with cardiovascular adjustments. Which of the 
following is not true in this context? 
a.  Rise in central venous pressure 
b.  Rise in heart rate 
c.  Decrease in cardiac output 
d.  Decrease in stroke volume 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Ganong physiology 25th Edition, Page No: 581 
Upon standing from a supine position, the normal re sponse is an increase in heart rate to maintain blo od pressure (BP). In 
patients with chronotropic incompetence, heart rate  may not increase upon standing, and they may exper ience 
orthostatic hypotension (OH). 
In the upright position, the venous pressure in the  parts of the body above the heart is decreased by the force of gravity. 
The neck veins collapse above the point where the v enous pressure is close to zero. However, the dural  sinuses have rigid 
walls and cannot collapse. 
The magnitude of the gravitational effect is 0.77 m m Hg/cm of vertical distance above or below the hea rt at the density of 
normal blood. Thus, in an adult human in the uprigh t position, when the mean arterial pressure at hear t level is 100 mm 
Hg, the mean pressure in a large artery in the head  (50 cm above the heart) is 62 mm Hg (100 − [0.77 ×  50]) and the 
pressure in a large artery in the foot (105 cm belo w the heart) is 180 mm Hg (100 + [0.77 × 105]). 
 
136. Heart rate is accelerated by: 
a.  Increased activity of arterial baroreceptor 
b.  Hypoxia 
c.  Expiration 
d.  Fear 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Ganong physiology 25th Edition, Page No: 590 
Heart rate accelerated by: 
 Decreased activity of arterial baroreceptors 
 Increased activity of atrial stretch receptors 
 Inspiration 
 Excitement 
 Anger 
 Most painful stimuli ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
59   
  Hypoxia 
 Exercise 
 Thyroid hormones 
 Fever 
Heart rate slowed by: 
 Increased activity of arterial baroreceptors 
 Expiration 
 Fear 
 Grief 
 Stimulation of pain fibers in trigeminal nerve 
 Increased intracranial pressure 
 
137. Meissner’s plexus is located in 
a.  Between the mucosa and inner circular muscle layer 
b.  Between inner circular layer and outer longitudinal  layer 
c.  Between outer longitudinal layer and serosa 
d.  Mucosa 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Ganong physiology 25th Edition, Page No: 472 
 Two major networks of nerve fibers are intrinsic to  the gastrointestinal tract: the myenteric plexus ( Auerbach 
plexus), between the outer longitudinal and middle circular muscle layers, and the submucous plexus (M eissner 
plexus), between the middle circular layer and the mucosa.  
 Collectively, these neurons constitute the enteric nervous system. The system contains about 100 milli on sensory 
neurons, interneurons, and motor neurons in humans— as many as are found in the whole spinal cord—and t he 
system is probably best viewed as a displaced part of the central nervous system (CNS) that is concern ed with the 
regulation of gastrointestinal function.  
 It is sometimes referred to as the “little brain” f or this reason. It is connected to the CNS by paras ympathetic and 
sympathetic fibers but can function autonomously wi thout these connections.  
 The myenteric plexus innervates the longitudinal an d circular smooth muscle layers and is concerned pr imarily 
with motor control, whereas the submucous plexus in nervates the glandular epithelium, intestinal endoc rine cells, 
and submucosal blood vessels and is primarily invol ved in the control of intestinal secretion. 
 
138. Hypertonic urine is excreted due to absorption  of water in 
a.  Collecting duct 
b.  PCT 
c.  Ascending loop 
d.  Descending loop 
 
Ans: a 
REF: Ganong physiology,25 th edition,page 684-685 / Guyton 13 th  edition page 374 
 The final concentration of urine is determined by t he amount of water reabsorption that occurs in the collecting 
ducts. The change in osmolarity of the urine depend s on the amount of ADH acting on the collecting duc ts. ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
60    The basic requirement for concentrated urine are: H igh level of ADH and high osmolarity of the renal m edullary 
interstitial fluid which provides the osmotic grad 
high level of ADH. 
 
139. Insulin resistance down regulates which recept or 
a.  GLUT 1 
b.  GLUT 2 
c.  GLUT 3 
d.  GLUT 4 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Ganong physiology 25th Edition, Page No: 433 
GLUT-4 is an insulin dependent GLUT. Other GLUTs are not insulin sensitive and are  constitutively expressed in the cell 
membrane. Thus GLUT 4 is downregulated in case of i nsulin resistance. 
Table: Glucose transporters 
 
Pathology 
140. Earliest transient change following tissue inj ury 
a.  Neutropenia 
b.  Neutrophilia 
c.  Monocytosis 
d.  Lymphocytosis 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Robbins Basic Pathology 10th Edition, Page No:  65 
The nature of the leukocyte infiltrate varies with the age of the inflammatory response and the type o f stimulus. 
forms of acute inflammation, neutrophils predominate in the inflammatory infiltrate during the first 6 to 24 ho urs and 
are gradually replaced by monocyte- derived macrophages over 24 to 48 hours. 
 
141. Pain is mediated by: 
The basic requirement for concentrated urine are: H igh level of ADH and high osmolarity of the renal m edullary 
interstitial fluid which provides the osmotic grad ient necessary for water reabsorption to occur in t he presence of 
139. Insulin resistance down regulates which recept or  
Ref: Ganong physiology 25th Edition, Page No: 433  
GLUT. Other GLUTs are not insulin sensitive and are  constitutively expressed in the cell 
membrane. Thus GLUT 4 is downregulated in case of i nsulin resistance.  
140. Earliest transient change following tissue inj ury will be: 
Ref: Robbins Basic Pathology 10th Edition, Page No:  65  
The nature of the leukocyte infiltrate varies with the age of the inflammatory response and the type o f stimulus. 
acute inflammation, neutrophils predominate in the inflammatory infiltrate during the first 6 to 24 ho urs and 
derived macrophages over 24 to 48 hours.  
QAE FALGUN 8  
 The basic requirement for concentrated urine are: H igh level of ADH and high osmolarity of the renal m edullary 
ient necessary for water reabsorption to occur in t he presence of 
GLUT. Other GLUTs are not insulin sensitive and are  constitutively expressed in the cell 
 
The nature of the leukocyte infiltrate varies with the age of the inflammatory response and the type o f stimulus. In most 
acute inflammation, neutrophils predominate in the inflammatory infiltrate during the first 6 to 24 ho urs and 
ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
61   a.  IL-1 
b.  C5a 
c.  PG 
d.  LT-D4 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: Robbins Basi c Pathology 10th Edition, Page No: 77 
 
142. Which of the following Is not a component of V irchow triad? 
a.  Endothelial injury 
b.  Stasis or turbulent blood flow 
c.  Hypercoagulability of the blood 
d.  Clumping of particles 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Robbins Basic Pathology 10th Edition, Page No: 106 
The primary abnormalities that lead to intravascula r thrombosis are (1) endothelial injury, (2) stasis  or turbulent blood 
flow, and (3) hypercoagulability of the blood (the so 
 
143. Amyloid precursor protein is associated with: 
a.  AL 
b.  AA 
c.  A beta 
d.  A alpha 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: Robbins Basic Pathology 10th Edition, Page No:  183 
The three most common forms of amyloid are the foll owing: 
 AL (amyloid light chain) amyloid is made up of complete immunoglobulin light chains,  the amino 
fragments of light chains, or both. 
 AA (amyloid-associated) amyloid is composed of an 8500 
precursor in the blood called SAA (serum amyloidass ociated) protein, which is synthesized in the liver . 
c Pathology 10th Edition, Page No: 77  
 
142. Which of the following Is not a component of V irchow triad?  
Edition, Page No: 106  
The primary abnormalities that lead to intravascula r thrombosis are (1) endothelial injury, (2) stasis  or turbulent blood 
flow, and (3) hypercoagulability of the blood (the so -called “Virchow triad”) 
associated with:  
Ref: Robbins Basic Pathology 10th Edition, Page No:  183  
The three most common forms of amyloid are the foll owing:  
is made up of complete immunoglobulin light chains,  the amino 
is composed of an 8500 -dalton protein derived by proteolysis from a larger  
precursor in the blood called SAA (serum amyloidass ociated) protein, which is synthesized in the liver . 
QAE FALGUN 8  
 The primary abnormalities that lead to intravascula r thrombosis are (1) endothelial injury, (2) stasis  or turbulent blood 
is made up of complete immunoglobulin light chains,  the amino -terminal 
dalton protein derived by proteolysis from a larger  
precursor in the blood called SAA (serum amyloidass ociated) protein, which is synthesized in the liver .  ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
62   
  β-amyloid protein (Aβ) is a 4000-dalton peptide that is derived by proteol ysis from a much larger transmembrane 
glycoprotein, called amyloid precursor protein.  
 
144. Down syndrome risk in mother of age more than 45 years is: 
a.  1: 1550 
b.  1:1000 
c.  1:100 
d.  1:25 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Robbins Basic Pathology 10th Edition, Page No:  264 
Down syndrome, characterized by extra copy of genes  on chromosome 21, is the most common of the chromo somal 
disorders . About 95% of affected persons have trisomy 21, so  their chromosome count is 47. As mentioned earlier , the 
most common cause of trisomy, and therefore of Down  syndrome, is meiotic nondisjunction. The parents o f such children 
are normal in all respects. Maternal age has a stro ng influence on the incidence of Down syndrome. It occurs in 1 in 1550 
live births in women younger than 20 years, in cont rast with 1 in 25 live births in women older than 4 5 years. 
 
145. ‘Popcorn cells’ are seen in which type of Hodg kin’s disease? 
a.  Lymphocyte dominant 
b.  Lymphocyte depleted 
c.  Nodular sclerosis 
d.  Mixed type 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Robbins Basic Pathology 10th Edition, Page No:  475 
Lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma, accounting  for about 5% of cases, is characterized by the pre sence of 
lymphohistiocytic (L&H) variant RS cells that have a delicate multilobed, puffy nucleus resembling pop ped corn (“popcorn 
cell”). 
 Lacunar cell is a variant of RS cell having a clear  space surrounding the cell. 
 Popcorn cell is a lymphohistiocytic (L-H) variant o f RS cell having a multilobed nucleus resembling a popcorn 
kernel. 
 CD 30 is the most sensitive marker of Reed Sternber g cell. 
 Cells similar or identical in appearance to Reed-St ernberg cells are also seen in other conditions lik e infectious 
mononucleosis, solid tissue cancers, and NHL (Immun oblastic lymphoma). 
 Thus, although Reed-Sternberg cells are requisite f or the diagnosis, they must be present in an approp riate 
background of non-neoplastic inflammatory cells (ly mphocytes, plasma cells, eosinophils). 
 
146. Emphysema seen in α1-anti-trypsin deficiency i s: 
a.  Centriacinar  
b.  Panacinar  
c.  Distal acinar 
d.  Irregular 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Robbins Basic Pathology 10th Edition, Page No:  501 ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
63   
  Emphysema is a chronic obstructive airway disease c haracterized by enlargement of air spaces distal to  terminal 
bronchioles. 
 Subtypes include centriacinar (most common: smoking  related), panacinar (seen in α1-anti-trypsin defic iency), 
distal acinar, and irregular. 
 Smoking and inhaled pollutants cause ongoing accumu lation of inflammatory cells, which are the source of 
proteases such as elastases that irreversibly damag e alveolar walls. 
 Patients with uncomplicated emphysema present with increased chest volumes, dyspnea, and relatively no rmal 
blood oxygenation at rest (“pink puffers”). 
 Most patients with emphysema also have signs and sy mptoms of concurrent chronic bronchitis, since ciga rette 
smoking is a risk factor for both. 
 
147. Sturge Weber syndrome is associated with: 
a.  Port wine stain 
b.  Cavernous hemangioma 
c.  Lymphangioma 
d.  Hemangiosarcoma 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Robbins Basic Pathology 10th Edition, Page No:  392 
Sturge–Weber syndrome is usually manifested at birt h by a port-wine stain on the forehead and upper ey elid of one side 
of the face. 
 The so-called “port wine stain” is a special form o f nevus flammeus. These lesions tend to grow during  childhood, 
thicken the skin surface, and do not fade with time . Such lesions occurring in the distribution of the  trigeminal 
nerve are associated with the Sturge- Weber syndrom e (also called encephalotrigeminal angiomatosis). 
 This uncommon congenital disorder is associated wit h facial port wine nevi, ipsilateral venous angioma s in the 
cortical leptomeninges, mental retardation, seizure s, hemiplegia, and radiologic opacities of the skul l.  
 Thus, a large facial telangiectasia in a child with  mental deficiencies may indicate the presence of a dditional 
vascular malformations. 
 
148. Sequestrated lobe of lung is commonly supplied  by which of the following vessels? 
a.  Pulmonary artery 
b.  Intercostal artery 
c.  Descending aorta 
d.  Bronchial artery 
 
Ans: c 
By definition, there is no communication with the t racheobronchial tree. In the vast majority of cases , the abnormal lung 
tissue has a systemic arterial supply which is usually a branch of the aorta : 
 Intralobar sequestrations  
o venous drainage commonly occurs via the pulmonary v eins, but can occur through the azygous-
hemiazygous system , portal vein , right atrium  or inferior vena cava  
o closely connected to the adjacent normal lung and d o not have a separate pleura 
 Extralobar sequestrations  
o venous drainage most commonly through the systemic veins into the right atrium (but is variable) 
o separated from any surrounding lung by its own pleu ra ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
64   
  
149. Gene for Wilms’ tumour is located on which of the following? 
a.  Chromosome 1 
b.  Chromosome 10 
c.  Chromosome 11 
d.  Chromosome 12 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: Robbins Basic Pathology 10th Edition, Page No:  289 
Three groups of congenital malformations are associ ated with an increased risk for Wilms tumor.  
These are WAGR syndrome (i.e., Wilms tumor, aniridi a, genital abnormalities, and mental retardation); Denys-Drash 
syndrome (DDS), and Beckwith- Wiedemann syndrome (B WS).  
Of patients with WAGR syndrome approximately one in three will go on to develop th is tumor. Another group of patients, 
those with so-called “Denys-Drash syndrome” (DDS), have an even higher risk (approximately 90%)  of Wilms tumor. 
Patients with the WAGR syndrome, as the name indica tes, have Wilms tumor, aniridia, genital abnormalit ies and mental 
retardation. 
DD syndrome is characterized by gonadal dysgenesis and early onset nephropathy leading to renal failur e.  
Both of these conditions are associated with abnorm alities of the Wilms tumor 1 (WT1) gene, located on  11p13.  
 
Pharmacology 
150. Cholinesterase reactivators is/are: 
a.  2-PAM 
b.  HI-6 
c.  Obidoxime 
d.  All 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Goodman and Gilman pharmacology 13 th  edition pg 174 
Cholinesterase reactivators are 
 2-PAM 
 HI-6 
 Obidoxime 
 
151. Non – nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibit ors (NNRTIs) include all of the following except: 
a.  Nevirapine  
b.  Delavirdine 
c.  Etavirine 
d.  Zalcitabine 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Goodman and Gilman pharmacology 13 th  edition pg 1140 ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
65    
152. Vasicoselective drugs is/are: 
a.  Oxybutynin 
b.  Tolterodine 
c.  Flavoxate 
d.  All 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: KDT Pharmacology 7th Edition, Page No: 117 
 Oxybutynin - This newer antimuscarinic has high affinity for rec eptors in urinary bladder and salivary 
alongwith additional smooth muscle relaxant and loc al anaesthetic properties. It is relatively selecti ve for M1/M3 
subtypes with less action on the M2 subtype. Becaus e of vasicoselective action, it is used for detruso r instability 
resulting in urina ry frequency and urge incontinence. 
 Tolterodine: This relatively M3 selective muscarini c antagonist has preferential action on urinary bla dder; less 
likely to cause dryness of mouth and other antichol inergic side effects. It is indicated in overactive  blad 
urinary frequency and urgency. 
 Flavoxate has properties similar to oxybutynin and is indicated in urinary frequency, urgency and dysu ria 
associated with lower urinary tract infection. 
 
153. Which is not an alkylating agent?   
 
Ref: KDT Pharmacology 7th Edition, Page No: 117 -118 
This newer antimuscarinic has high affinity for rec eptors in urinary bladder and salivary 
alongwith additional smooth muscle relaxant and loc al anaesthetic properties. It is relatively selecti ve for M1/M3 
subtypes with less action on the M2 subtype. Becaus e of vasicoselective action, it is used for detruso r instability 
ry frequency and urge incontinence.  
Tolterodine: This relatively M3 selective muscarini c antagonist has preferential action on urinary bla dder; less 
likely to cause dryness of mouth and other antichol inergic side effects. It is indicated in overactive  blad 
Flavoxate has properties similar to oxybutynin and is indicated in urinary frequency, urgency and dysu ria 
associated with lower urinary tract infection.  
QAE FALGUN 8  
 This newer antimuscarinic has high affinity for rec eptors in urinary bladder and salivary glands 
alongwith additional smooth muscle relaxant and loc al anaesthetic properties. It is relatively selecti ve for M1/M3 
subtypes with less action on the M2 subtype. Becaus e of vasicoselective action, it is used for detruso r instability 
Tolterodine: This relatively M3 selective muscarini c antagonist has preferential action on urinary bla dder; less 
likely to cause dryness of mouth and other antichol inergic side effects. It is indicated in overactive  blad der with 
Flavoxate has properties similar to oxybutynin and is indicated in urinary frequency, urgency and dysu ria ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
66   
 a.  Cyclophosphamide 
b.  Busulphan 
c.  5-Fluorouracil 
d.  Melphalan 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: KDT Pharmacology 7th Edition, Page No: 858 
Alkylating agents 
Nitrogen mustards 
Mechlorethamine (Mustine HCl) Cyclophosphamide, Ifo sfamide, Chlorambucil, Melphalan 
 
Ethylenimine  
Thio-TEPA 
 
Alkyl sulfonate  
Busulfan 
 
Nitrosoureas 
Carmustine , Lomustine 
 
Triazine 
Dacarbazine, Temozolomide 
 
Methyl hydrazine 
Procarbazine 
 
5-Flourouracil-Antimetabolites (pyrimidine antagoni st) 
 
154. Mechanism of action of docusate: 
a.  Bulk formation 
b.  Softening of stool 
c.  Osmotic purgative 
d.  Stimulant purgative 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: KDT Pharmacology 7th Edition, Page No: 672 
 
1. Bulk forming: Dietary fibre: Bran, Psyllium (Pla ntago) Ispaghula, And Methylcellulose 
2. Stool softener: Docusates (DOSS), Liquid paraffi n 
3. Stimulant purgatives  
(a) Diphenyl methanes 
 Phenolphthalein, 
 Bisacodyl,  
 Sodium apicosulfate 
(b) Anthraquinones (Emodins) ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
67   
  Senna, Cascara sagrada  
(c) 5-HT4 agonist 
 Prucalopride  
(d) Fixed oil 
 Castor oil 
 
4. Osmotic purgatives 
Magnesium salts: sulfate, hydroxide  
Sodium salts: sulfate, phosphate  Sod. pot. tartrat e 
Lactulose 
 
155. Which Of the following is not adverse effect o f imatinib? 
a.  Periorbital edema 
b.  Myalgia 
c.  Pleural effusion 
d.  Arthralgia 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: KDT Pharmacology 7th Edition, Page No: 870 
 Imatinib -It is the first selectively targeted drug  to be introduced for treatment of a malignancy. It  inhibits a 
specific tyrosine protein kinase labelled ‘Bcr-Abl’  tyrosine kinase expressed by chronic myeloid leuka emia (CML) 
cells and related receptor tyrosine kinases includi ng platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) receptor. 
 Imatinib is found to be strickingly successful in c hronic phase of CML (remission in >90% cases) and i n metastatic 
c-kit-positive GIST, in which it is the drug of cho ice. 
Adverse effects are  
 abdominal pain, vomiting, fluid retention, periorbi tal edema, pleural effusion, myalgia, liver damage and CHF 
 
156. Patient on treatment on carbidopa + levodopa f or 10 years now has weaning off effect. What should  be added to 
restore action: 
a.  Amantadine 
b.  Rasagiline 
c.  Tolcapone 
d.  Benzhexol 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: KDT Pharmacology 7th Edition, Page No: 432 
 Two selective, potent and reversible COMT inhibitor s Entacapone and Tolcapone have been introduced as 
adjuvants to levodopa-carbidopa for advanced Parkin son disease. 
 Entacapone and tolcapone enhance and prolong the th erapeutic effect of levodopa- carbidopa in advanced  and 
fluctuating Parkinson disease. They may be used to smoothen ‘wearing off’, increase ‘on’ time, decreas e ‘off’ time, 
improve activities of daily living and allow levodo pa dose to be reduced. 
 
157. True about imipenem is: 
a.  It is narrow spectrum antibiotic  
b.  It is easily broken by beta lactamase ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
68   
 c.  It can be used with cilastatin 
d.  Doesn’t cause seizure at in predisposed patients 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: KDT Pharmacology 7th Edition, Page No: 731 
Imipenem is derivative of thienamycin, imipenem is an extremely potent  and broad- spectrum β-lactam antibiotic. It is 
resistant  to most β-lactamases; inhibits penicillinase produ cing staphylococci. Though some MRSA are inhibited,  it is not 
reliable for treating such infections. A limiting f eature of imipenem is its rapid hydrolysis  by the enzyme 
dehydropeptidase I located on the brush border of renal tubular cells.  An innovative solution to this problem is its 
combination with cilastatin , a reversible inhibitor of dehydropeptidase I.  
Imipenem has propensity to induce seizures at higher doses and in predisposed patients. Diarrh oea, vomiting, skin rashes 
and other hypersensitivity reactions are the side e ffects. 
 
158. Insulin secretion increasing drug by acting on  beta cells of pancreas is: 
a.  Metformin 
b.  Repaglinide 
c.  Pioglitazone 
d.  Acarbose 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: KDT Pharmacology 7th Edition, Page No: 271-277  
Repaglinide -This meglitinide analogue oral hypoglycemic is des igned to normalize meal- time glucose excursions. T hough 
not a sulfonyl- urea, it acts in an analogous manne r by binding to sulfonyl- urea receptor→ closure of  ATP dependent K+ 
channels → depolarizayμ5-Ion → insulin release. 
 
Metformin  reduce blood glucose 
1.  Suppresses hepatic gluconeogenesis and glucose outp ut from liver. 
2.  Enhances insulin-mediated glucose uptake and dispos al in skeletal muscle and fat. Insulin resistance e xhibited by 
type-2 diabetics is thus overcome. 
3.   Interferes with mitochondrial respiratory chain an d promotes peripheral glucose utilization through a naerobic 
glycolysis. 
 
Pioglitazone -This class  of oral antidiabetic drugs are selecti ve agonists for the nuclear Peroxisome proliferator -activated 
receptor γ (PPARγ) which is expressed mainly in fat  cells, but also in muscle and some other cells. It  enhances the 
transcription of several insulin responsive genes. Glitazones tend to reverse insulin resistanc e by enhancing GLUT4 
expression and translocation. Entry of glucose into  muscle and fat is improved. Hepatic gluconeogenesi s is also 
suppressed. Activation of genes regulating fatty ac id metabolism and lipogenesis in adipose tissue con tributes to the 
insulin sensitizing a ction. 
 
Acarbose -It is a complex Oligosaccharide Which  reversibly inhibits α-glucosidases, the final enzymes for the digestion of 
carbohydrates in the brush border of small intestin e mucosa. It slows down and decreases digestion and  absorption of 
polysaccharides (starch, etc.) and sucrose. 
 
159. Zileuton a 5 lipoxygenase inhibitor acts by wh ich of following mechanism: 
a.  LTC4 ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
69   
 b.  LTB4 
c.  LTD4 
d.  All 
 
Ans. d 
Ref: KDT Pharmacology 7th Edition, Page No: 229 
Zileuton - It is a 5-LOX inhibitor, blocks LTC4/D4 as well as LTB4 synthesis. It therefore has the potential to prevent all LT 
induced responses including those exerted by activa tion of cysteinyl leukotrienes receptor.  
However, clinical efficacy in asthma is similar to montelukast.  
The duration of action of zileuton is short  and it has hepatotoxic  potential. These limitations have restricted its u se. 
 
Biochemistry 
160. (GAA)n trinucleotide repeat is seen in: 
a.  Huntington disease 
b.  Myotonic dystrophy 
c.  Fragile X syndrome 
d.  Friedreich ataxia 
 
Ans: d  
Ref: Harper Biochemistry 30th Edition, Page No: 378  
Trinucleotide sequences that increase in number (mi crosatellite instability) can cause disease.  
Diseases  Trinucleotide repeat  
 
Fragile X syndrome  (CGG)  
Huntington’s chorea  (CAG)  
Myotonic dystrophy   (CTG)  
Spinobulbar muscular atrophy   (CAG)  
Kennedy disease  (CAG)  
Friedreich ataxia     (GAA)  
 
 
161. Which of the following cell types are stable c ell? 
a.  Neuron 
b.  Lymphocytes 
c.  RBC 
d.  Cardiac and skeletal muscle 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: USMLE Step 1 First Aid 2020, Page No: 46 
Cell types    
Permanent  Remain in G0, regenerate from 
stem cells. Neurons, skeletal and cardiac 
muscle, RBCs. 
Stable  Enter G1 from G0 when 
stimulated. Hepatocytes, lymphocytes, PCT, 
periosteal cells. ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
70   
 Labile  Never go to G0, divide rapidly with 
a short G1. Most affected by 
chemotherapy. Bone marrow, gut epithelium, skin, 
hair follicles, germ cells. 
 
162. All of the following are true about Menkes dis ease except: 
a.  Autosomal recessive 
b.  Defective protein (ATP7A) 
c.  Decrease activity of lysyl oxidase 
d.  Symptoms are brittle, “kinky” hair, growth retardat ion, and hypotonia. 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: USMLE Step 1 First Aid 2020, Page No: 52 
X-linked recessive  connective tissue disease caused by impaired coppe r absorption and transport due to defective 
Menkes protein (ATP7A) . Leads to decrease activity of lysyl oxidase (copper is a necessary cofactor) and defective 
collagen. Results in brittle, “kinky” hair, growth retardation, and hypotonia. 
 
163. Porphyria cutanea tarda is due to deficiency o f which enzyme: 
a.  Uroporphyrinogen I synthase 
b.  Uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase 
c.  Coproporphyrinogen oxidase 
d.  Protoporphyrinogen oxidase 
 
Ans: b 
Ref:  Satyanarayan Biochemistry, 4th edition, Page No: 203 
Porphyria  Enzyme deficiency  
Acute intermittent porphyria  Uroporphyrinogen I synthase  
Porphyria cutanea tarda  Uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase  
Hereditary coproporphyria  Corpoporphyrinogen oxidase  
Variegate porphyria  Protoporphyrinogen oxidase  
Congenital erythropoietic porphyria  Uroporphyrinogen III cosynthase  
Protoporphyria  Ferrochelatase  
 
164. Insulin-dependent transport system occurs in: 
a.  Hepatocytes 
b.  Erythrocytes 
c.  Brain 
d.  Muscle 
 
Ans: d 
Ref:  Satyanarayan Biochemistry, 4 th  edition, Page No: 245 
Entry of glucose into cells 
Glucose concentration is very low in the cells comp ared to plasma (for humans < 100 mg/dl).However, gl ucose does not 
enter the cells by simple diffusion. Two specific t ransport systems are recognized for the entry of gl ucose into the cells. 
1.  Insulin-independent transport system of glucose  : This is a carrier mediated uptake of glucose whi ch is not 
dependent on the hormone insulin. This is operative  in hepatocytes , erythrocytes  and brain. ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
71   
 2.  Insulin-dependent transport system : This occurs in muscle  and adipose tissue. 
 
165. Enzymatic marker of plasma membrane is: 
a.  5’- nucleotides 
b.  Adenylyl cyclase 
c.  Na+K+ ATPase 
d.  All 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Harper Biochemistry 30th Edition, Page No: 481  
Membrane  Enzyme  
Plasma   5′-Nucleotidase  
Adenylyl cyclase  
Na+K+ATPase 
Endoplasmic reticulum  Glucose -6 Phosphatase   
Golgi apparatus  Galactosyl transferase     
Inner mitochondrial membrane  ATP synthase  
 
166. Total no of dehydrogenase in Krebs’s cycle: 
a.  2 
b.  3 
c.  4 
d.  6 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: Harper Biochemistry 30th Edition, Page No: 163  
 Isocitrate dehydrogenase 
 α-Ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex 
 Succinate dehydrogenase 
 Malate dehydrogenase 
 
167. Which complex of electron transport chain is i nhibited by cyanide: 
a.  Complex I 
b.  Complex II 
c.  Complex III 
d.  Complex IV 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Harper Biochemistry 30th Edition, Page No: 132  
Barbiturates such as amobarbital  inhibit electron transport via  
 Complex I by blocking the transfer from Fe-S to Q.  
 Malonate  is a competitive inhibitor of Complex II. 
 Antimycin A and dimercaprol  inhibit the respiratory chain at Complex III. 
 H2S, carbon monoxide, and cyanide inhibit Complex IV 
 ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
72   
 Atractyloside  inhibits oxidative Phosphorylation by inhibiting t he transporter of ADP into and ATP out of the 
mitochondrion .The antibiotic oligomycin  completely blocks oxidation and Phosphorylation by  blocking the flow of 
protons through ATP synthase. 
 
Microbiology 
168. Ingestion of eggs from the dog roundworm(Toxoc ara canis) and raccoon roundworm (Baylisascaris pro cyonis) can 
lead to: 
a.  Visceral larva migrans 
b.  Ocular larva migrans 
c.  Neural larva migrans 
d.  All 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Jawetz Microbiology 26th Edition, Page No: 745  
 Ingestion of eggs from the dog roundworm (Toxocara canis) and raccoon roundworm (Baylisascarisprocyoni s) can 
lead to Visceral larva migrans, Ocular larva migran s, and neural larva migrans. 
 The larvae hatch out of the eggs in the intestine a nd migrate throughout the circulation. Larvae lodge  in various 
tissues, which results in the formation of granulom as around the larvae.  
 Symptoms of VLM include fever, hepatomegaly, and eo sinophilia;  
 OLM can lead to impaired vision and blindness in th e affected eye.  
 A single larva in the brain (NLM) can lead to serio us motor dysfunction and blindness, and infections by the 
raccoon roundworm can be fatal. 
 
169. Pharyngoconjunctival Fever is caused by: 
a.  Adenovirus  
b.  Parainfluenza 
c.  Coxsackie 
d.  All 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Jawetz Microbiology 26th Edition, Page No: 462  
 Adenoviruses infect and replicate in epithelial cel ls of the respiratory tract, eye, gastrointestinal tract, and urinary 
tract. 
 Eye infections due to Adenovirus 
 Mild ocular involvement may be part of the respirat orypharyngeal syndromes caused by adenoviruses. 
Pharyngoconjunctival fever tends to occur in outbreaks, such as at children’s summer camps (“swimming pool 
conjunctivitis”), and is associated with types  3 and 7. T he duration of conjunctivitis is 1–2 weeks, and com plete 
recovery with no lasting sequelae is the common out come. 
 A more serious disease is epidemic keratoconjunctiv itis. It is caused by types 8, 19, and 37. The dise ase is 
characterized by acute conjunctivitis followed by k eratitis that usually resolves in 2 weeks but may l eave 
subepithelial opacities in the cornea for up to 2 y ears. 
 Coxsackie viruses, a large subgroup of the enterovi ruses, were divided into two groups, A and B, havin g different 
pathogenic potentials for mice. They produce a vari ety of illnesses in humans, including aseptic menin gitis and 
respiratory and undifferentiated febrile illnesses.  ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
73   
  Herpangina (vesicular pharyngitis), hand-foot-and-m outh disease, and acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis are caused 
by certain coxsackievirus group A serotype. 
 Pleurodynia (epidemic myalgia), myocarditis, perica rditis, and severe generalized disease of infants a re caused by 
some group B coxsackie viruses.  
 Parainfluenza viruses are ubiquitous and cause comm on respiratory illnesses in persons of all ages. Th ey are major 
pathogens of severe respiratory tract disease in in fants and young children. 
 
170. Which of the following parasite doesn’t enter into body by skin penetration?  
a.  Dracunculus 
b.  Necator Americana 
c.  Ancylostoma duodenale 
d.  Strongyloides 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Jawetz Microbiology 26th Edition, Page No: 744  
The guinea worm, Dracunculus medinensis, has an aqu atic cycle via copepods (“water fleas”—an abundant group of 
aquatic microcrustaceans). Copepods ingest larvae r eleased from human skin blisters that burst when im mersed in cold 
water, spewing great numbers of larvae. Infected co pepods are  inadvertently ingested by drinking unfi ltered, infested 
water. After a year of systemic wandering in the bo dy, the worms mature and mate. The females then tra vel to the skin, 
usually to the lower leg—where they induce blisters  that form near the foot and ankle. 
 
Ancylostoma duodenal and Necatar  Americanus(Human Hookworm-Intestinal nematode) 
Larvae penetrate host skin and migrate throughout t he host similarly to Ascaris and end up in the smal l intestine where 
they mature into adult worms. 
 
171. Which of the following is dimorphic fungus? 
a.  Rhizopus 
b.  Sporothrix schenckii 
c.  Tinea Versicolor 
d.  Microsporum 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Jawetz Microbiology 26th Edition, Page No: 681  
Systemic mycoses—coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis , blastomycosis, and paracoccidioidomycosis are the rmally 
dimorphic fungus. 
Subcutaneous mycoses- Sporothrix schenckii is a thermally dimorphic fungus that lives on vegetation. It is associated w ith 
a variety of plants—grasses, trees, sphagnum moss, rose bushes, and other horticultural plants. At amb ient temperatures, 
it grows as a mold, producing branching, septate hy phae and conidia, and in tissue or in vitro at 35–3 7°C as a small 
budding yeast. Following traumatic introduction int o the skin, S schenckii causes Sporotrichosis, a ch ronic granulomatous 
infection. 
 
172. Treponema is most difficult to isolate from: 
a.  Gumma 
b.  Chancre 
c.  Mucosal lesion ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
74   
 d.  Macular rash 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Jawetz Microbiology 26th Edition, Page No: 329  
 Syphilitic infection may remain subclinical, and th e patient may pass through the primary or secondary  stage (or 
both) without symptoms or signs yet develop tertiar y lesions. 
 In about 30% of cases, early syphilitic infection p rogressesspontaneously to complete cure without tre atment. In 
another 30%, the untreated infection remains latent  (principally evident by positive serologic test re sults). In the 
remainder, the disease progresses to the “tertiary stage” characterized by the development of granulom atous 
lesions (gummas) in the skin, bones, and liver; deg enerative changes in the central nervous system 
(meningovascular syphilis, paresis, tabes); or card iovascular lesions (aortitis, aortic aneurysm, aort ic valve 
insufficiency).  
 In all tertiary lesions, treponemes are very rare an d the exaggerated tissue response must be attribute d to 
hypersensitivity to the organisms.  However, treponemes can occasionally be found in t he eye or central nervous 
system in late syphilis. 
 
173. Genetic reassortment is a feature of :  
a.  Hepdna  
b.  Rota virus  
c.  Herpes  
d.  Astro virus  
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Jawetz Microbiology 26th Edition, Page No: 551 ,578 
 Genetic reassortment = mixing of genetic material into new combinations .Genetic reassortment occurs readily with 
rotaviruses and also seen in influenza virus. 
 
Influenza virus 
Because of the segmented nature of the genome, when  a cell is coinfected by two different viruses of a  given type, 
mixtures of parental gene segments may be assembled  into progeny virions. This phenomenon, called gene tic 
reassortment, may result in sudden changes in viral  surface antigens—a property that explains the epid emiologic features 
of influenza. 
 
174. All of the following are true about Trichomona s vaginalis except: 
a.  Trichomonas vaginalis is sexually transmitted 
b.  Trichomonas vaginalis exists  as a trophozoite and cyst form 
c.  It has four free flagella that arise from a single stalk and a fifth flagellum, which forms an undulat ing membrane. 
d.  The incubation period is from around 5 to 28 days 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Jawetz Microbiology 27th Edition, Page No: 723  
 Trichomonas vaginalis exists only as a trophozoite (no cyst stage); it has four free flagella that ari se from a single 
stalk and a fifth flagellum, which forms an undulat ing membrane.  
 It is pyriform and approximately 20 μm in length an d 10 μm wide. 
 ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
75   
 Pathology and Pathogenesis 
 Trichomonas vaginalis is sexually transmitted, and most infections are asymptomatic or mild for both w omen and 
men. In women, the infection is normally limited to  the vulva, vagina, and cervix; it does not usually  extend to the 
uterus.  
 The mucosal surfaces may be tender, inflamed, erode d, and covered with a frothy yellow or cream-colore d 
discharge. In men, the prostate, seminal vesicles, and urethra may be infected. Signs and symptoms in females, in 
addition to profuse vaginal discharge, include loca l tenderness, vulval pruritus, and burning. About 1 0% of infected 
males have a thin, white urethral discharge. The in cubation period is from around 5 to 28 days. 
 
175. COVID-19 is cause by: 
a.  Negative-sense single-stranded RNA virus 
b.  SARS-CoV-1 
c.  Bat-borne virus 
d.  MERS-CoV 
 
Ans: c 
Best answer is C 
It is believed to have zoonotic origins and has clo se genetic similarity to bat coronaviruses, suggesting it emerged from a 
bat-borne virus . 
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 ( SARS-CoV-2 ) is the virus strain that causes coronavirus disea se 2019 
(COVID-19), a respiratory illness. It is colloquial ly known as the coronavirus, and was previously ref erred to by its 
provisional name 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) . SARS-CoV-2 is a positive-sense single-stranded RNA virus . It is 
contagious in humans, and the World Health Organiza tion (WHO) has designated the ongoing pandemic of C OVID-19 a 
Public Health Emergency of International Concern. 
 
 
Community Medicine 
176. 'Clean care is safer care' guideline given by WHO is for 
a.  Hand hygiene 
b.  Obstetric care 
c.  Cord care 
d.  Injection practices 
 
Ans: a 
The initial focus of Clean Care is Safer Care  was to promote best hand hygiene practices globall y, at all levels of 
health care , as a first step in ensuring high standards of inf ection control and patient safety. 
 
177. Panel discussion can be defined as:  
a.  Series of speeches 
b.  Discussion by 4-8 qualified persons 
c.  Groups describing individual experiences 
d.  Stage wise formatted teaching 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Park's Textbook of Preventive and Social Medic ine; 24th Edition; Page No: 902 ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
76   
  In a panel discussion, 4 to 8 persons who are quali fied to talk about the topic sit and discuss a give n problem, or 
the topic, in front of a large group or audience.  
 The panel comprises, a chairman or moderator and fr om 4 to 8 speakers. The chairman opens the meeting,  
welcomes the group and introduces the panel speaker s.  
 He introduces the topic briefly and invites the pan el speakers to present their points of view. There is no specific 
agenda, no order of speaking and no set speeches.  
 The success of the panel depends upon the chairman;  he has to keep the discussion going and develop th e train of 
thought. 
 
178. Outdated cytotoxic drugs are best disposed by:  
a.  Disposal in municipal waste 
b.  Screw-feed technology  
c.  Store for months and burial 
d.  Autoclave 
 
Ans: b 
Ref: Park's Textbook of Preventive and Social Medic ine; 24th Edition; Page No: 828 
 Screw-feed technology is the basis of a non-burn, d ry thermal disinfection process in which waste is s hredded and 
heated in a rotating auger. 
 The waste is reduced by 80 per cent in volume and b y 20-35 per cent in weight.  
 This process is suitable for treating infectious wa ste and sharps, but it should not be used to proces s pathological, 
cytotoxic or radio-active waste. 
 
179. Disease is due to social strain caused by soci al demands is: 
a.  Feminist Theory 
b.  Parsonian theory 
c.  Marxist theory 
d.  Foucauldian Theory 
 
Ans: b 
Theories in Sociology 
 Feminist Theory: Focuses on how gender inequality h as shaped social life; Disease is due to social rol e of women 
enforced by men 
 Parsonian theory: States that illness did not simpl y imply a 'biologically altered state, but also a s ocially altered 
state; Disease is due to social strain caused by so cial demands 
 Marxist theory: Is concerned with the relationship between health and illness and capitalist social or ganization; 
Cause of disease is putting profit ahead of health 
 Foucauldian Theory: medical discourse plays an impo rtant role in the management of individual bodies 
(anantomopolitics) and bodies en masse (biopolitics ); Disease is labels to segregate population to mak e it easier to 
control 
 
180. Fermentation of pulses increases following exc ept: 
a.  Thiamine 
b.  Riboflavin 
c.  Niacin ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
77   d.  Ascorbic acid 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Park's Textbook of Preventive and Social Medicine; 24th Edition; Page No: 666 
Fermentation also modifies the nutritive value of p ulses in that the vitamin content particularly that  of riboflavin, 
thiamine and niacin is enhanced. 
 
Fermentation of pulses 
 Increase content of B complex vi tamins (Thiamine, Riboflavin, Niacin, Biotin, Cyano cobalamin) 
 Decrease phytate and trypsin inhibitors 
 Increase ionizable iron content 
 
181. Lowest protein content is present in which mil k? 
a.  Human 
b.  Goat 
c.  Buffalo 
d.  Cow 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Park's Textbook of Preventive and Social Medicine; 24th Edition; Page No: 668 
 
Research methodology 
182. Approach to medical practice intended to optim ize decision 
well-conducted research conclusion is: 
a.  Research based practice 
b.  Evidence based practice 
c.  Allopathic practice 
d.  Homeopathic practice 
 
Ans: b 
Evidence- based medicine (EBM) is an approach to medical prac tice intended to optimize decision 
the use of evidence from well- designed and well 
and Social Medicine; 24th Edition; Page No: 666  
Fermentation also modifies the nutritive value of p ulses in that the vitamin content particularly that  of riboflavin, 
tamins (Thiamine, Riboflavin, Niacin, Biotin, Cyano cobalamin) 
Decrease phytate and trypsin inhibitors  
181. Lowest protein content is present in which mil k?  
and Social Medicine; 24th Edition; Page No: 668  
 
182. Approach to medical practice intended to optim ize decision -making by emphasizing the use of well 
based medicine (EBM) is an approach to medical prac tice intended to optimize decision 
designed and well -conducted research.  
QAE FALGUN 8  
 Fermentation also modifies the nutritive value of p ulses in that the vitamin content particularly that  of riboflavin, 
tamins (Thiamine, Riboflavin, Niacin, Biotin, Cyano cobalamin)  
making by emphasizing the use of well -designed and 
based medicine (EBM) is an approach to medical prac tice intended to optimize decision -making by emphasizing ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
78   
 Although all medicine based on science has some deg ree of empirical support, EBM goes further, classif ying evidence by 
its epistemologic strength and requiring that only the strongest types (coming from meta-analyses, sys tematic reviews, 
and randomized controlled trials) can yield strong recommendations; weaker types (such as from case-co ntrol studies) can 
yield only weak recommendations. 
 
183. Galbraith Radial plot is used in: 
a.  Meta analysis 
b.  RCT 
c.  Case control study 
d.  Cross sectional study 
 
Ans: a 
Galbraith plot/Radial plot is one way of displaying  several estimates of the same quantity that have d ifferent standard 
errors. It can be used to examine heterogeneity in a meta-analysis, as an alternative or supplement to  a forest plot. 
 
184. Which of the following denotes measures of var iability? 
a.  Range  
b.  Mean deviation 
c.  Standard deviation 
d.  All of the above 
 
Ans: d 
Measures of Variability 
 Range 
 Inter-quartile range 
 Mean deviation 
 Standard deviation 
 Coefficient of variation 
 
185. In a study first schools are sampled, then sec tions, and finally students. This type of sampling is known as:  
a.  Stratified sampling 
b.  Simple random sampling 
c.  Cluster sampling 
d.  Multistage sampling 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Mahajan Biostatistics 8th Edition, page No: 12 4 
Multistage Sampling 
 As the name implies, this method refers to the samp ling procedures carried out several stages using ra ndom 
sampling techniques. 
 This is employed in large country surveys. In the f irst stage, random numbers of districts are chosen in all the 
states, followed by random numbers of talukas, vill ages and units, respectively, e.g. for hookworm sur vey in a 
district, choose 10% villages in the talukas and th en examine stools of all persons in every 10th hous e. 
Merits 
 It introduces flexibility in sampling, which is lac king in other techniques. ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
79   
  It enables the use of existing division and subdivi sion which saves extra labor. 
 
Forensic Medicine 
186. Palato-print is commonly taken from which part  of palate: 
a.  Anterior part 
b.  Lateral wall 
c.  Medial wall 
d.  Posterior part 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Gautam Biswas Forensic Medicine, 3rdEdition, P age No: 96 
Palatoscopy/palato-print/rugoscopy:  
 It is the study of palatal rugae in order to establ ish identity.  
 Rugae (‘ plica palatine ’) are anatomical fold or wrinkles formed 12–14th w eek of IU life. This irregular fibrous 
connective tissue is located on the anterior third of the palate, behind the incisive papilla. Palatin e rugae are 
unique and can be used for identification in circum stances when it is difficult to identify a dead per son through 
dental records or fingerprints (even in advanced de composition).  
 This method of identification is useful, if antemor tem record of palatal rugae is available. 
This method is useful since: 
 Rugae pattern remain stable throughout life and doe s not change during growth. 
 It is protected from trauma due to its situation an d from heat by buccal pad of fat and tongue. 
 Even in twins, the pattern of rugae may be similar but not identical. 
 
187. A 4 th  year medical student go accidental needlestick inj ury. Later on investigation the patient was found t o be HIV 
positive. Transmission rate of HIV in such case is:  
a.  0.3%  
b.  3% 
c.  5%  
d.  10% 
 
Ans: a 
Ref: Gautam Biswas Forensic Medicine, 3rdEdition, P age No: 123 
Risk of transmission from single percutaneous expos ure to blood for: 
 HBV: 6–30%  
 HIV: 0.1–0.36% 
 HCV: 2.7–10% 
 
188. Lichtenberg flowers are seen in: 
a.  Thermal burns  
b.  Electrocution 
c.  Vitriolage  
d.  Lightning 
 
Ans: d 
Ref: Gautam Biswas Forensic Medicine, 3rdEdition, P age No: 278 ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
80   
  Lichtenberg flowers: It is known by different names  like ‘arborization’, ‘feathering’, ‘ferning’, ‘fil igree burns’ or 
‘keraunographic markings’. 
 Lichtenberg flowers are pathognomonic of lightning strike, but are rare. 
 These are superficial, several inches long, thin, i rregular, tortuous, dendritic red marks on the skin . 
 These marks have a resemblance to the branches of a  tree. 
 This fern-like pattern of erythema in the skin is u sually found over the shoulders or flanks. 
 It is not associated with burning. 
 They indicate the path taken by the discharge and t end to follow skin creases and the long axis of the  body. 
 It appears within 1 h, and disappears in 24–48 h, i f the person survive. 
 
189. Definite diagnosis of pregnancy include all, e xcept: 
a.  Fetal heart sound 
b.  Palpation of fetal parts 
c.  Fetal skeleton on X-ray 
d.  hCG in blood 
 
Ans: d 
Evidence of fetal parts is included in Definitive d iagnosis. 
 
190. Universal antidote contains the following, exc ept: 
a.  Powdered charcoal  
b.  Tannic acid 
c.  Ground mustard  
d.  Magnesium oxide 
 
Ans: c 
Ref: Gautam Biswas Forensic Medicine, 3rdEdition, P age No: 475 
Universal Antidote: It is a combination of physical and chemical antido tes; used in those cases where the nature of 
ingested poisons is unknown or when it is suspected  that two or more poisons were taken. 
 Powdered charcoal (burnt toast): 2 parts: Adsorbs a lkaloids 
 Magnesium oxide (milk of magnesia): 1 part: Neutral izes acids 
 Tannic acid (strong tea): 1 part: Precipitates alka loids, glycosides and metals 
 
Mandatory CPD Topics 
191. For an informed consent to be valid, the patie nt has to be given: 
a.  Potential benefits and risks, side effects and harm s of available treatment options 
b.  Their alternatives, their consequences and complica tions 
c.  The consequences of no treatment which enable the p atients to exercise their right to self-decision 
d.  All of the above 
 
Ans: d 
Informed Consent 
Informed consent is the fundamental ethical and leg al cornerstone of the doctor-patient relationship. For an informed 
consent to be valid, the patient has to be given 
 Adequate information regarding nature of illness, ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
81   
  Potential benefits and risks, side effects and harm s of available treatment options, 
 Their alternatives, their consequences and complica tions, and 
 The consequences of no treatment which enable the p atients to exercise their right to self-decision. 
 
192. MD/MS resident can do: 
a.  Practice at any other hospital attached to his prim ary program 
b.  Private practice not attached to his primary progra m during off time 
c.  Allowed private practice by the university 
d.  All of the above 
 
Ans: a 
Involvement of a medical practitioner during her/hi s residency, fellowship (MD, MS, DM, MCh), in priva te practice or 
practice at any other hospital not attached to his primary program is highly unethical and will be lia ble for disciplinary 
action. 
 
193. A medical doctor should follow which of the fo llowing while exercising organ transplantation? 
a.  Human Organ Transplant Act 2051 amended on 2072 
b.  Human Organ Transplant Act 2053 amended on 2074 
c.  Human Organ Transplant Act 2055 amended on 2074 
d.  Human Organ Transplant Act 2055 amended on 2072 
 
Ans: d 
Organ transplant and organ donation 
Medical practitioners should exercise the principle s and the provisions of the Human Organ Transplant Act 2055 amended 
on 2072 
 
194. Which of the following is correct recommendati on when you choose to wear a mask? 
a.  Before touching the mask, clean hands with an alcoh ol-based hand rub or soap and water 
b.  Take the mask and inspect it for tears or holes 
c.  Place the mask to your face. Pinch the metal strip or stiff edge of the mask so it moulds to the shape  of your nose 
d.  All of the above 
 
Ans: d 
If you choose to wear a mask: 
 Before touching the mask, clean hands with an alcoh ol-based hand rub or soap and water 
 Take the mask and inspect it for tears or holes. 
 Orient which side is the top side (where the metal strip is). 
 Ensure the proper side of the mask faces outwards ( the colored side). 
 Place the mask to your face. Pinch the metal strip or stiff edge of the mask so it moulds to the shape  of your nose. 
 Pull down the mask’s bottom so it covers your mouth  and your chin. 
 Do not touch the mask while you are wearing it for protection. 
 After use, take off the mask with clean hands; remo ve the elastic loops from behind the ears while kee ping the 
mask away from your face and clothes, to avoid touc hing potentially contaminated surfaces of the mask.  
 Discard the mask in a closed bin immediately after use. Do not reuse the mask. ONLINE PG NEPAL  
 
82    Perform hand hygiene after touching or discarding t he mask 
wash your hands with soap and water. 
 
195. What makes items as safe to handle is:  
a.  Sterilization 
b.  Disinfection 
c.  Asepsis 
d.  Sanitization 
 
Ans: d 
 Sterilization: Destroys all microbes including spor e 
 Disinfection: Destroys all microbes except spore 
 Asepsis: Chemical agents applied to body surfaces 
 Decontamination (or Sanitization): Makes items 
 
196. Best disinfectant for endoscopes is: 
a.  Hypochlorite 
b.  Formaldehyde 
c.  Glutaraldehyde 
d.  Chlorhexidine 
 
Ans: c 
 
197. You are in your OPD. A top level bureaucrat is  very angry outside, because he has been in queue w ith the general 
public. He has sent messages many times to check him in priori ty. What will you do? 
a.  Give him priority as he may be busy in various othe r issues 
b.  Scold him and ask him to stay in queue 
c.  Gently counsel him and ask to maintain the queue 
d.  Cancel his appointment 
Perform hand hygiene after touching or discarding t he mask – Use alcohol- based hand rub or, if visibly soiled, 
wash your hands with soap and water.  
 
Sterilization: Destroys all microbes including spor e  
Disinfection: Destroys all microbes except spore  
Asepsis: Chemical agents applied to body surfaces  
Decontamination (or Sanitization): Makes items as safe to handle. 
197. You are in your OPD. A top level bureaucrat is  very angry outside, because he has been in queue w ith the general 
has sent messages many times to check him in priori ty. What will you do?  
Give him priority as he may be busy in various othe r issues  
Scold him and ask him to stay in queue  
Gently counsel him and ask to maintain the queue  
QAE FALGUN 8  
 based hand rub or, if visibly soiled, 
 
197. You are in your OPD. A top level bureaucrat is  very angry outside, because he has been in queue w ith the general 
ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
83   
  
Ans: c 
 
198. Bag-valve-mask is  
a.  Best option for prehospital airway support.  
b.  Appropriate for elective ventilation in the operati ng room 
c.  Emergency skill 
d.  All of the above 
 
Ans: d 
 Bag-valve-mask (BVM) ventilation is an essential em ergency skill. This basic airway management techniq ue allows 
for oxygenation and ventilation of patients until a  more definitive airway can be established and in c ases where 
endotracheal intubation or other definitive control  of the airway is not possible. For the emergency m edical 
technician, basic BVM ventilation is most often the  only option for airway management. 
 In the pediatric population, BVM may be the best op tion for prehospital airway support. BVM ventilatio n is also 
appropriate for elective ventilation in the operati ng room (OR) when intubation is not required, but i t is now often 
replaced in this setting by the laryngeal mask airw ay. 
 
199. Hands-only CPR consists: 
a.  Chest compressions  
b.  Artificial ventilation 
c.  Mouth to mouth respiration 
d.  Inotropes 
 
Ans: a 
 CPR consists of the use of chest compressions and a rtificial ventilation to maintain circulatory flow and 
oxygenation during cardiac arrest.  
 A variation of CPR known as “hands-only” or “compre ssion-only” CPR (COCPR) consists solely of chest 
compressions.  
 This variant therapy is receiving growing attention  as an option for lay providers (that is, nonmedica l witnesses to 
cardiac arrest events). 
 
200. Your consultant is about to close the abdomen after a very long emergency laparotomy. He is a for midable 
personality and earlier told you to stop talking so  that he could concentrate on finishing the operati on. Although you 
have not been paying full attention, you think that  a swab might have been left behind but are far fro m certain. What 
will you do? 
a.  Immediately inform the consultant of your suspicion  
b.  Ask the scrub nurse to recount the swabs 
c.  Ask another question to ‘break the ice’, before rai sing the possibility of a swab being left in the ab domen 
d.  Remain quiet as you were not really paying attentio n 
 
Ans: a 
In this unenviable position, you are nevertheless d uty bound to raise your concern and should do so wi th the operating 
surgeon (A). The scrub nurse should certainly recou nt the swabs, but this instruction might be better coming from the 
surgeon himself; therefore (B) is less ideal. ONLINE PG NEPAL  QAE FALGUN 8  
 
84   
 NEXT MD/MS BASED ENTRANCE 
07:00 PM - 10:00 PM, Falgun 12, 2077 (Wednesday eve ning):  CEE (200 marks) MD/MS Based [Online Only] 
11:00 AM - 02:00 PM, Falgun 15, 2077 (Saturday noon ):  CEE (200 marks) MD/MS Based [Both Online & Writ ten] 
 
Visit our Website for Online Test: www.onlinepgnepa l.com  
 
BEST W ISHES  
 